OVERVIEW
What is democracy? What are its features? This chapter builds on a simple
definition of democracy. Step by step, we work out the meaning of the
terms involved in this definition. The aim here is to understand clearly the
bare minimum features of a democratic form of government. After going
through this chapter we should be able to distinguish a democratic form
of government from a non-democratic government. Towards the end of
this chapter, we step beyond this minimal objective and introduce a broader
idea of democracy.
Democracy is the most prevalent form of government in the world today
and it is expanding to more countries. But why is it so? What makes it
better than other forms of government? That is the second big question
that we take up in this chapter.CHAPTER 1
Wha t is
Democr acy?
Why
Democr acy?
2024-25
---
2 DEMOCRA TIC POLITICS
I have heard a
different version.
Democracy is off
the people, far
(from) the people
and (where they)
buy the people.
Why don’t we
accept that?1.1WHAT IS DEMOCRAC Y?
But we don’t know if this is the best way of
defining unless we think about it ourselves. We
must not accept something just because it is
famous, just because everyone accepts it.
Yolanda : Ma’am, can I suggest something? W e don’t
need to look for any definition. I read somewhere
that the word democracy comes from a Greek
word ‘Demokratia’. In Greek ‘demos’ means
people and ‘kratia’ means rule. So democracy is
rule by the people. This is the correct meaning.
Where is the need to debate?
Lyngdoh Madam : That is also a very helpful way
of thinking about this matter . I would just say
that this does not always work. A word does not
remain tied to its origin. Just think of computers.
Originally they were used for computing, that is to
say calculating, very difficult mathematical sums.
These were ver y power ful calculators. But nowa-
days very few people use computers for comput-
ing sums. They use it for writing, for designing, for
listening to music and for watching films. Words
remain the same but their meaning can change
with time. In that case it is not very useful to look
at the origins of a word.
Merry : Ma’am, so basically what you are saying
is that there is no shortcut to our thinking about
the matter ourselves. We have to think about its
meaning and evolve a definition.
Lyngdoh Madam : You got me right. Let us get on
with it now .
ACTIVITY
Let us take Lyngdoh Madam seriously and try to
write down the exact definition of some of the
simple words that we use all the time: pen, rain
and love. For example, is there a way of defining a
pen that distinguishes it clearly from a pencil, a
brush, a chalk or crayon.
/UIstopWhat have you learnt from this attempt?
/UIstopWhat does it teach us about understanding the
meaning of democracy?
A simple definitionA simple definitionA simple definitionA simple definitionA simple definition
Let us get back to our discussion on
similarities and differences among
governments that are calledYou have already read about different
forms of government. On the basis of
your understanding of democracy
so far, mentioning a few examples
write down some common features of:
/UIstopDemocratic governments
/UIstopNon-democratic governments
Why define democracy?Why define democracy?Why define democracy?Why define democracy?Why define democracy?
Before we proceed further, let us
first take note of an objection by
Merry. She does not like this way
of defining democracy and wants
to ask some basic questions.
Her teacher Matilda Lyngdoh
responds to her questions, as other
classmates join the discussion:
Merry : Ma’am, I don’t like this idea. First we spend
time discussing democracy and then we want
to find out the meaning of democracy . I mean
logically shouldn’t we have approached it the
other way round? Shouldn’t the meaning have
come first and then the example?
Lyngdoh Madam: I can see your point. But that is
not how we reason in everyday life. We use
words like pen, rain or love. Do we wait to have
a definition of these words before we use them?
Come to think of it, do we have clear definition
of these words? It is only by using a word that
we understand its meaning.
Merry : But then why do we need definitions at all?
Lyngdoh Madam : We need a definition only when
we come across a difficulty in the use of a word.
We need a definition of rain only when we wish to
distinguish it from, say , drizzle or cloudburst. The
same is tr ue for democracy . We need a clear
definition only because people use it for different
purposes, because very different kinds of gov-
ernments call themselves democracy .
Ribiang : But why do we need to work on a defini-
tion? The other day you quoted Abraham
Lincoln to us: “Democracy is government of
the people, by the people and for the people”.
We in Meghalaya always ruled ourselves. That
is accepted by everyone. Why do we need to
change that?
Lyngdoh Madam : I am not saying we need to
change it. I too find this definition very beautiful.
2024-25
---
3
 WHAT IS DEMOCRAC Y? W HY DEMOCRAC Y?
CHECK
YOUR
PROGRESSRibiang went back home and collected some more famous quotations on democracy . This time she
did not mention the names of the people who said or wrote these. She wants you to read these and
comment on how good or useful these thoughts are:
/UIstopDemocracy gives ever y man the right to be his own oppressor .
/UIstopDemocracy consists of choosing your dictators after they’ve told you what you think it is you want
to hear .
/UIstopMan’s capacity for justice makes democracy possible, but man’s inclination to injustice makes
democracy necessary
/UIstopDemocracy is a device that insures we shall be governed no better than we deserve.
/UIstopAll the ills of democracy can be cured by more democracy .democracies. One simple factor
common to all democracies is: the
government is chosen by the people.
We could thus start with a simple
definition: democracy is a form of
government in which the rulers are
elected by the people.
This is a useful starting point. This
definition allows us to separate
democracy from forms of government
that are clearly not democratic. The
army rulers of Myanmar were not
elected by the people. Those who
happened to be in control of the army
became the rulers of the country.
People had no say in this decision.
Dictators like Pinochet (Chile) are not
elected by the people. This also
applies to monarchies. The kings of
Saudi Arabia rule not because the
people have chosen them to do so butbecause they happen to be born into
the royal family.
This simple definition is not
adequate. It reminds us that
democracy is people’s rule. But if we
use this definition in an unthinking
manner, we would end up calling
almost every government that holds
an election a democracy. That would
be very misleading. As we shall find
out in Chapter 3, every government
in contemporary world wants to be
called a democracy, even if it is not
so. That is why we need to carefully
distinguish between a government
that is a democracy and one that
pretends to be one. We can do so by
understanding each word in this
definition carefully and spelling out
the features of a democratic
government.
This car toon was
drawn when elections
were held in Iraq with
the presence of US
and other foreign
powers. What do you
think this car toon is
saying? Why is
‘democracy’ written
the way it is?
rrrrreeeeeaaaaaddddd
ttttthe hehe hehe
cccccaaaaarrrrrtttttoon oonoon oonoon
©Stephane Peray , Thailand, Cagle Cartoons Inc.
2024-25
---
4 DEMOCRA TIC POLITICS
want in a democracy? Or must a
democratic government function
with some limits? Is it necessary
for a democracy to respect some
rights of the citizens?
Let us consider each of these
questions with the help of some
examples.
Major decisions by electedMajor decisions by electedMajor decisions by electedMajor decisions by electedMajor decisions by elected
leaders leadersleaders leadersleaders
In Pakistan, General Pervez
Musharraf led a military coup in
October 1999. He overthrew a
democratically elected government
and declared himself the ‘Chief
Executive’ of the country. Later he
changed his designation to President
and in 2002 held a referendum in
the country that granted him a five-
year extension. Pakistani media,
human rights organisations and
democracy activists said that the
referendum was based on1.2 F EATURES  OF DEMOCRAC Y
Syria is a small west
Asian countr y. The
ruling Ba’ath P arty
and some of its small
allies are the only
parties allowed in that
countr y. Do you think
this car toon could
apply to China or
Mexico? What does
the crown of leaves
on democracy
signif y?
rrrrreeeeeaaaaaddddd
ttttthe hehe hehe
cccccaaaaarrrrrtttttoon oonoon oonoon©Emad Hajjaj, Jordan, Cagle Cartoons Inc. 7 June 2005We have started with a simple
definition that democracy is a form
of government in which the rulers
are elected by the people . This
raises many questions:
/UIstopWho are the rulers  in this
definition? Which officials must
be elected for any government to
be called a democracy? Which
decisions may be taken by non-
elected officials in a democracy?
/UIstopWhat kind of election  constitutes
a democratic election? What
conditions must be fulfilled for an
election to be considered
democratic?
/UIstopWho are the people  who can elect
the rulers or get elected as rulers?
Should this include every citizen on
an equal basis? Can a democracy
deny some citizens this right?
/UIstopFinally, what kind of a form of
government  is democracy? Can
elected rulers do whatever they
2024-25
---
5
rrrrreeeeeaaaaaddddd
ttttthe hehe hehe
cccccaaaaarrrrrtttttoon oonoon oonoon
malpractices and fraud. In August
2002 he issued a ‘Legal Framework
Order’ that amended the
Constitution of Pakistan. According
to this Order, the President can
dismiss the national and provincial
assemblies. The work of the civilian
cabinet is supervised by a National
Security Council which is
dominated by military officers. After
passing this law, elections were
held to the national and provincial
assemblies. So Pakistan has had
elections, elected representatives
have some powers. But the final
power rested with military officers
and General Musharraf himself.
Clearly, there are many reasons
why Pakistan under General
Musharraf should not be called a
democracy. But let us focus on one
of these. Can we say that the rulers
are elected by the people in
Pakistan? Not quite. People may
have elected their representatives to
the national and provincial
assemblies but those elected
representatives were not really therulers. They cannot take the final
decisions. The power to take final
decision rested with army officials
and with General Musharraf, and
none of them were elected by the
people. This happens in many
dictatorships and monarchies. They
formally have an elected parliament
and government but the real power
is with those who are not elected.
In a few countries, the real power
was with some external powers and
not with locally elected
representatives. This cannot be
called people’s rule.
This gives us the first feature. In a
democracy the final decision-
making power must rest with those
elected by the people.
Free and fair electoralFree and fair electoralFree and fair electoralFree and fair electoralFree and fair electoral
competitioncompetitioncompetitioncompetitioncompetition
In China, elections are regularly
held after every five years for
electing the country’s parliament,
called Quanguo Renmin Daibiao
Dahui (National People’s Congress).
The National People’s Congress has
the power to appoint the President
of the country. It has nearly 3,000
members elected from all over
China. Some members are elected
by the army. Before contesting
elections, a candidate needs the
approval of the Chinese Communist
Party. Only those who are members
of the Chinese Communist Party or
eight smaller parties allied to it were
allowed to contest elections held in
2002-03. The government is always
formed by the Communist Party.
Since its independence in 1930,
Mexico holds elections after every
six years to elect its President. The
country has never been under a
military or dictator’s rule. But until
2000 every election was won by aThis car toon was
drawn in the context
of Latin America. Do
you think it applies to
the P akistani situation
as well? Think of
other countries where
this could apply?
Does this happen
sometimes in our
countr y as well?
WHAT IS DEMOCRAC Y? W HY DEMOCRAC Y?©Ares, Caglecartoon.com, Cagle Cartoons Inc. 22 January 2005
All this is so remote
for me. Is
democracy all
about rulers and
governments? Can
we talk about a
democratic
classroom? Or a
democratic family?
2024-25
---
6 DEMOCRA TIC POLITICS
party called PRI (Institutional
Revolutionary Party). Opposition
parties did contest elections, but
never managed to win. The PRI was
known to use many dirty tricks to
win elections. All those who were
employed in government offices
had to attend its party meetings.
Teachers of government schools
used to force parents to vote for the
PRI. Media largely ignored the
activities of opposition political
parties except to criticise them.
Sometimes the polling booths were
shifted from one place to another in
the last minute, which made it
difficult for people to cast their votes.
The PRI spent a large sum of money
in the campaign for its candidates.
Should we consider the elections
described above as examples of
people electing their rulers? Reading
these examples we get a sense that
we cannot. There are many problems
here. In China the elections do not
offer the people any serious choice.
They have to choose the ruling party
and the candidates approved by it.
Can we call this a choice? In the
Mexican example, people seemed to
really have a choice but in practice
they had no choice. There was no
way the ruling party could be
defeated, even if people were against
it. These are not fair elections.
We can thus add a second feature
to our understanding of democracy.
Holding elections of any kind is not
sufficient. The elections must offer
a real choice between political
alternatives. And it should be
possible for people to use this choice
to remove the existing rulers, if they
wish so. So, a democracy must be
based on a free and fair election
where those currently in power
have a fair chance of losing. We
shall find out more about a
democratic election in Chapter 3.One person, One person,One person, One person,One person,  one v  one v one v  one v one v ot otot otote ee ee, ,, ,,
one value one valueone value one valueone value
Earlier, we read about how the struggle
for democracy was linked to the
demand for universal adult franchise.
This principle has now come to be
accepted almost all over the world. Yet
there are many instances of denial of
equal right to vote.
/UIstopUntil 2015, in Saudi Arabia women
did not have the right to vote.
/UIstopEstonia has made its citizenship
rules in such a way that people
belonging to Russian minority
find it difficult to get the right to
vote.
/UIstopIn Fiji, the electoral system is
such that the vote of an
indigenous Fiji has more value
than that of an Indian-Fijian.
Democracy is based on a
fundamental principle of political
equality. That gives us the third
feature of democracy: in a
democracy, each adult citizen must
have one vote and each vote must
have one value . We shall read more
about it in Chapter 3.This car toon was
titled ‘Building
Democracy’ and was
first published in a
Latin American
publication. What do
moneybags signif y
here? Could this
cartoon be applied to
India?
rrrrreeeeeaaaaaddddd
ttttthe hehe hehe
cccccaaaaarrrrrtttttoon oonoon oonoon©Nerilicon, El Economista , Mexico, Cagle Cartoons Inc.
17 May 2005
2024-25
---
7
rrrrreeeeeaaaaaddddd
ttttthe hehe hehe
cccccaaaaarrrrrtttttoon oonoon oonoon
WHAT IS DEMOCRAC Y? W HY DEMOCRAC Y?This car toon is about
the Iraqi election held
after Saddam
Hussein’s regime was
overthrown. He is
shown behind the
bars. What is the
cartoonist saying
here? Compare the
message of this
cartoon with the first
cartoon in this
chapter .
R RR RRule of la ule of laule of la ule of laule of la w and r w and rw and r w and rw and r espe espeespe espeespe c cc cct tt ttfor rights for rightsfor rights for rightsfor rights
Zimbabwe attained independence
from White minority rule in 1980.
Since then the country has been
ruled by ZANU-PF, the party that led
the freedom struggle. Its leader,
Robert Mugabe, ruled the country
since independence. Elections were
held regularly and always won by
ZANU-PF. President Mugabe was
popular but also used unfair practices
in elections. Over the years his
government changed the constitution
several times to increase the powers
of the President and make him less
accountable. Opposition party
workers were harassed and their
meeting disrupted. Public protests
and demonstrations against the
government were declared illegal.
There was a law that limited the right
to criticise the President. Television
and radio were controlled by the
government and gave  only the
ruling party’s version. There were
independent newspapers but thegovernment harasse d those
journalists who went against it. The
government ignored some court
judgments that went against it and
pressurised judges.  He was forced
out of office in 2017.
The example of Zimbabwe shows
that popular approval of the rulers is
necessary in a democracy, but it is
not sufficient. Popular governments
can be undemocratic. Popular leaders
can be autocratic. If we wish to assess
a democracy, it is important to look
at the elections. But it is equally
important to look before and after the
elections. There should be sufficient
room for normal political activity,
including political opposition, in the
period before elections. This requires
that the state should respect some
basic rights of the citizen. They should
be free to think, to have opinions, to
express these in public, to form
associations, to protest and take other
political actions. Everyone should be
equal in the eyes of law. These rights
must be protected by an independentWhy talk about
Zimbabwe? I read
similar reports from
many parts of our
own country . Why
don’t we discuss
that?
©John T rever , Albuquerque Journal , US, Cagle Cartoons Inc.
2024-25
---
8 DEMOCRA TIC POLITICS
judiciary whose orders are obeyed by
everyone. We shall read more about
these rights in Chapter 5.
Similarly, there are some conditions
that apply to the way a government
is run after the elections. A
democratic government cannot do
whatever it likes, simply because it
has won an election. It has to respect
some basic rules. In particular it has
to respect some guarantees to the
minorities. Every major decision has
to go through a series of
consultations. Every office bearer has
certain rights and responsibilities
assigned by the constitution and the
law. Each of these is accountable not
only to the people but also to other
independent officials. We shall read
more about this in Chapter 4.
Both these aspects give us the fourth
and final feature of democracy:
a democratic government rules
within limits set by constitutional
law and citizens’ rights .S SS SSummar ummarummar ummarummar y def y defy def y defy def inition initioninition initioninition
Let us sum up the discussion so far.
We started with a simple definition
that democracy is a form of
government in which the rulers are
elected by the people . We found that
this definition was not adequate
unless we explained some of the key
words used in it. Through a series of
examples we worked out four features
of democracy as a form of
government.  Accordingly, democracy
is a form of government in which:
/UIstopRulers elected by the people take
all the major decisions;
/UIstopElections offer a choice and fair
opportunity to the people to
change the current rulers;
/UIstopThis choice and opportunity is
available to all the people on an
equal basis; and
/UIstopThe exercise of this choice leads
to a government limited by basic
rules of the constitution and
citizens’ rights.Chinese gover nment
blocked free flow of
information on the
internet by placing
restrictions on popular
websites like ‘Google’
and ‘Y ahoo’. The
image of tanks and an
unarmed student
reminds the reader of
another major event in
recent Chinese
histor y. Find out about
that event.
rrrrreeeeeaaaaaddddd
ttttthe hehe hehe
cccccaaaaarrrrrtttttoon oonoon oonoon
©Eric Allie, Pioneer Press, US, Cagle Cartoons Inc., 27 February 2006
2024-25
---
9
CHECK
YOUR
PROGRESS
WHAT IS DEMOCRAC Y? W HY DEMOCRAC Y?Read these five examples of working or denial of democracy . Match each of these with the relevant
feature of democracy discussed above.
Example Feature
King of Bhutan has declared that in future he will be
guided by the advice given to him by elected representatives.
Many T amil workers who migrated from India were
not given a right to vote in Sri Lanka.
The king imposed a ban on political gatherings,
demonstrations and rallies.
The Indian Supreme Cour t held that the dissolution of
Bihar assembly was unconstitutional.
Political par ties in Bangladesh have agreed that a neutral
government should rule the country at the time of elections.
1.3 W HY DEMOCRACY ?
An argument broke out in Madam
Lyngdoh’s class. She had finished
teaching the previous section on
what is democracy and asked the
students if they thought democracy
was the best form of government.
Everyone had something to say.
Debating merits ofDebating merits ofDebating merits ofDebating merits ofDebating merits ofdemocr democrdemocr democrdemocr ac acac acacy yy yy
Yolanda:  We live in a democratic countr y. All over
the world people want democracy . Countries that
were not democratic earlier are becoming demo-
cratic now . All great people have said nice things
about democracy . Isn’t it obvious that democracy
is the best? Do we need to debate this?
Tangkini:  But L yngdoh Madam had said we should
not accept something just because it is famous,
just because everyone else accepts it. Isn’t it
possible that everyone is following a wrong
path?
Jeni:  Yes, it actually is a wrong path. What has
democracy brought to our country? Seven
decades of democracy and there is so much
pover ty in the countr y.
Ribiang:  But what has democracy got to do with
it? Do we have pover ty because we are demo-
cratic or do we have pover ty despite being a
democracy?Jeni:  Whatever , how does it make a difference?
The point is that this can’t be the best form of
government. Democracy is all about chaos, in-
stability , corruption and hypocrisy . Politicians
fight among themselves. Who cares for the coun-
try?
Poimon:  So, what should we have instead? Go
back to the British rule? Invite some kings to
rule this country?
Rose: I don’t know . I think what this countr y needs
is a strong leader , someone who does not have
to bother about elections and parliament. One
leader should have all the powers. He should
be able to do whatever is needed in country’s
interest. That alone can remove corruption and
pover ty from this countr y.
Someone shouted : That is called dictatorship!
Hoi: What if that person star ts using all these pow -
ers for himself and his family? What if he is
corrupt himself?
Rose:  I am speaking only of the honest, sincere
and strong leader .
Hoi: But that is not fair . You are comparing a real
democracy with an ideal dictatorship.
We should compare an ideal with an ideal, the
real with the real. Go and check the record of
dictators in real life. They are most corrupt, self-
ish and brutal. It is just that we don’t get to know
about this. And what is worse, you can’t even
get rid of them.I want to be in
Lyngdoh Madam’s
class! That sounds
like a democratic
classroom.
Doesn’t it?
Rule of law
Respect for Rights
One person one vote
one value
Free and fair
electoral competition
Major decisions by
elected leaders
2024-25
---
10 DEMOCRA TIC POLITICSMadam Lyngdoh was listening to
this discussion with interest. Now
she stepped in: “I was delighted to
see you all arguing so passionately.
I don’t know who is right and who
is wrong. That is for you to settle.
But I did feel that you all wanted to
speak your mind. You may have felt
very bad if someone tried to stop you
or if someone punished you for
saying what you felt. Would you be
able to do that in a country that is
not democratic? Is that a good
argument for democracy?”
Arguments against democracyArguments against democracyArguments against democracyArguments against democracyArguments against democracy
This conversation has most of the
arguments that we routinely hear
against democracy. Let us go over
some of these arguments:
/UIstopLeaders keep changing in a
democracy. This leads to instability.
/UIstopDemocracy is all about political
competition and power play. There
is no scope for morality.
/UIstopSo many people have to be
consulted in a democracy that it
leads to delays.
/UIstopElected leaders do not know the
best interest of the people. It leads
to bad decisions.
/UIstopDemocracy leads to corruption for
it is based on electoral competition.
/UIstopOrdinary people don’t know what
is good for them; they should not
decide anything.
Are there some other arguments
against democracy that you can
think of? Which of these arguments
applies mainly to democracy? Which
of these can apply to misuse of any
form of government? Which of these
do you agree with?
Clearly, democracy is not a
magical solution for all the
problems. It has not ended poverty
in our country and in other parts of
the world. Democracy as a form of
government only ensures thatpeople take their own decisions.
This does not guarantee that their
decisions will be good. People can
make mistakes. Involving the people
in these decisions does lead
to delays in decision making. It
is also true that democracy leads
to frequent changes in leadership.
Sometimes this can set back
big decisions and affect the
government’s efficiency.
These arguments show that
democracy of the kind we see may
not be the ideal form of government.
But that is not a question we face in
real life. The real question we face
is different: is democracy better than
other forms of government that are
there for us to choose from?
Arguments for democracyArguments for democracyArguments for democracyArguments for democracyArguments for democracy
China’s famine of 1958-1961 was
the worst recorded famine in world
history. Nearly three crore people
died in this famine. During those
days, India’s economic condition
was not much better than China. Yet
India did not have a famine of the
kind China had. Economists thinkThis car toon is from
Brazil, a countr y that
has long experience
of dictatorship.  It is
entitled “The Hidden
Side of Dictatorship”.
Which hidden sides
does this car toon
depict? Is it
necessar y for ever y
dictatorship to have a
hidden side? If
possible, find this out
about the dictators
including Pinochet in
Chile, Jaruzelski in
Poland, Sani Abacha
in Nigeria and
Ferdinand Marcos in
the Philippines.
rrrrreeeeeaaaaaddddd
ttttthe hehe hehe
cccccaaaaarrrrrtttttoon oonoon oonoon
©Osmani Simanca, Brazil,
Cagle Cartoons Inc. 6 December 2004
2024-25
---
11
that this was a result of different
government policies in the two
countries. The existence of
democracy in India made the
Indian government respond to food
scarcity in a way that the Chinese
government did not. They point out
that no large-scale famine has ever
taken place in an independent and
democratic country. If China too had
multiparty elections, an opposition
party and a press free to criticise the
government, then so many people
may not have died in the famine.
This example brings out one of the
reasons why democracy is considered
the best form of government.
Democracy is better than any other
form of government in responding to
the needs of the people. A non-
democratic government may and can
respond to the people’s needs, but it
all depends on the wishes of the
people who rule. If the rulers don’t
want to, they don’t have to act
according to the wishes of the people.
A democracy requires that the rulers
have to attend to the needs of the
people. A democratic government is
a better government because it is a
more accountable form of
government .
There is another reason why
democracy should lead to better
decisions than any non-democratic
government. Democracy is based on
consultation and discussion. A
democratic decision always involves
many persons, discussions and
meetings. When a number of people
put their heads together, they are
able to point out possible mistakes
in any decision. This takes time. But
there is a big advantage in taking
time over important decisions. This
reduces the chances of rash or
irresponsible decisions. Thus
democracy improves the quality
of decision-making.This is related to the third
argument. Democracy provides a
method to deal with differences
and conflicts. In any society people
are bound to have differences of
opinions and interests. These
differences are particularly sharp in
a country like ours which has an
amazing social diversity. People
belong to different regions, speak
different languages, practise
different religions and have different
castes. They look at the world very
differently and have different
preferences. The preferences of one
group can clash with those of other
groups. How do we resolve such a
conflict? The conflict can be solved
by brutal power. Whichever group
is more powerful will dictate its
terms and others will have to accept
that. But that would lead to
resentment and unhappiness.
Different groups may not be able to
live together for long in such a way.
Democracy provides the only
peaceful solution to this problem. In
democracy, no one is a permanent
winner. No one is a permanent loser.
Different groups can live with one
another peacefully. In a diverse
country like India, democracy keeps
our country together.
These three arguments were about
the effects of democracy on the
quality of government and social life.
But the strongest argument for
democracy is not about what
democracy does to the government.
It is about what democracy does to
the citizens. Even if democracy does
not bring about better decisions and
accountable government, it is still
better than other forms of
government. Democracy enhances
the dignity of citizens . As we
discussed above, democracy is
based on the principle of political
equality, on recognising that theWhat would have
happened if India
was not a
democracy?
Could we have
stayed together as
a single nation?
WHAT IS DEMOCRAC Y? W HY DEMOCRAC Y?
2024-25
---
12 DEMOCRA TIC POLITICS
CHECK
YOUR
PROGRESSpoorest and the least educated has
the same status as the rich and the
educated. People are not subjects of
a ruler, they are the rulers
themselves. Even when they make
mistakes, they are responsible for
their conduct.
Finally, democracy is better than
other forms of government because
it allows us to correct its own
mistakes . As we saw above, there is
no guarantee that mistakes cannot
be made in democracy. No form of
government can guarantee that. The
advantage in a democracy is that
such mistakes cannot be hidden for
long. There is a space for public
discussion on these mistakes. And
there is a room for correction. Eitherthe rulers have to change their
decisions, or the rulers can be
changed. This cannot happen in a
non-democratic government.
Let us sum it up. Democracy
cannot get us everything and is not
the solution to all problems. But it
is clearly better than any other
alternative that we know. It offers
better chances of a good decision,
it is likely to respect people’s own
wishes and allows different kinds of
people to live together. Even when
it fails to do some of these things, it
allows a way of correcting its
mistakes and offers more dignity to
all citizens. That is why democracy
is considered the best form of
government.This car toon was
published in Canada
just before its
parliamentar y
elections of 2004.
Everyone, including
the car toonist,
expected the Liberal
party to win once
again. When the
results came, the
Liberal P arty lost the
elections. Is this
cartoon an argument
against democracy or
for democracy?
Rajesh and Muzaffar read an ar ticle. It showed that no democracy has ever gone to war with another
democracy . Wars take place only when one of the two gover nments is non-democratic. The ar ticle said
that this was a great merit of democracy . After reading the essay , Rajesh and Muzaffar had different
reactions. R ajesh said that this was not a good argument for democracy . It was just a matter of chance.
It is possible that in future democracies may have wars. Muzaffar said that it could not be a matter of
chance. Democracies take decisions in such a way that it reduces the chances of war . Which of the two
positions do you agree with and why?
rrrrreeeeeaaaaaddddd
ttttthe hehe hehe
cccccaaaaarrrrrtttttoon oonoon oonoon
©Cam Cardow , The Ottawa Citizen , Canada, Cagle Cartoons Inc. 30 May 2004.
2024-25
---
13
1.4 B ROADER  MEANINGS  OF DEMOCRACY
In this chapter we have considered
the meaning of democracy in a
limited and descriptive sense. We
have understood democracy as a
form of government. This way of
defining democracy helps us to
identify a clear set of minimal
features that a democracy must
have. The most common form that
democracy takes in our times is that
of a representative democracy. You
have already read about this in the
previous classes. In the countries we
call democracy, all the people do not
rule. A majority is allowed to take
decisions on behalf of all the people.
Even the majority does not rule
directly. The majority of people rulethrough their elected representatives.
This become necessary because:
/UIstopModern democracies involve such
a large number of people that it is
physically impossible for them to
sit together and take a collective
decision.
/UIstopEven if they could, the citizen does
not have the time, the desire or the
skills to take part in all the
decisions.
This gives us a clear but minimal
understanding of democracy. This
clarity helps us to distinguish
democracies from non-democracies.
But it does not allow us to
distinguish between a democracy
and a good democracy. It does not
WHAT IS DEMOCRAC Y? W HY DEMOCRAC Y?
rrrrreeeeeaaaaaddddd
ttttthe hehe hehe
cccccaaaaarrrrrtttttoon oonoon oonoonThis famous car toon
by R K Laxman
comments on the
celebrations of the
fifty years of
independence. How
many images on the
wall do you recognize?
Do many common
people feel the way the
common man in this
cartoon does?
©R.K . Laxman, The Times of India
2024-25
---
14 DEMOCRA TIC POLITICS
allow us to see the operation of
democracy beyond government. For
this we need to turn to broader
meanings of democracy.
Sometimes we use democracy for
organisations other than the
government. Just read these
statements:
/UIstop“We are a very democratic family.
Whenever a decision has to be taken,
we all sit down and arrive at a
consensus. My opinion matters as much
as my father’s .”
/UIstop“I don’t like teachers who do not allow
students to speak and ask questions in
the class. I would like to have teachers
with democratic temperament. ”
/UIstop“One leader and his family members
decide everything in this party. How can
they talk of democracy? ”
These ways of using the word
democracy go back to its basic
sense of a method of taking
decisions. A democratic decision
involves consultation with and
consent of all those who are affected
by that decision. Those who are not
powerful have the same say in
taking the decision as those who are
powerful. This can apply to a
government or a family or any other
organisation. Thus democracy is
also a principle that can be applied
to any sphere of life.
Sometimes we use the word
democracy not to describe any
existing government but to set up
an ideal standard that all
democracies must aim to become:
/UIstop“True democracy will come to this
country only when no one goes hungry
to bed. ”
/UIstop“In a democracy every citizen must be
able to play equal role in decision
making. For this you don’t need just an
equal right to vote. Every citizen needs
to have equal information, basic
education, equal resources and a lot of
commitment. ”If we take these ideals seriously,
then no country in the world is a
democracy. Yet an understanding of
democracy as an ideal reminds us
of why we value democracy. It
enables us to judge an existing
democracy and identify its
weaknesses. It helps us to
distinguish between a minimal
democracy and a good democracy.
In this book we do not deal much
with this expanded notion of
democracy. Our focus here is with
some core institutional features of
democracy as a form of government.
Next year you will read more about
a democratic society and ways of
evaluating our democracy. At this
stage we just need to note that
democracy can apply to many
spheres of life and that democracy
can take many forms. There can be
various ways of taking decisions in
a democratic manner, as long as the
basic principle of consultation on an
equal basis is accepted. The most
common form of democracy in
today’s world is rule through
people’s elected representatives. We
shall read more about that in
Chapter 3. But if the community is
small, there can be other ways of
taking democratic decisions. All the
people can sit together and take
decisions directly. This is how
Gram Sabha should work in a
village. Can you think of some other
democratic ways of decision making?
ACTIVITY
Find out the total number of eligible voters in your
assembly constituency and your parliamentary
constituency . Find out how many people can fit
into the largest stadium in your area. Is it possible
for all the voters in your parliamentary or assembly
constituency to sit together and have a meaningful
discussion?
In my village the
Gram Sabha never
meets. Is that
democratic?
2024-25
---
15 WHAT IS DEMOCRAC Y? W HY DEMOCRAC Y?1 Here is some information about four countries. Based on this
information, how would you classify each of these countries. Write
‘democratic’, ‘undemocratic’ or ‘not sure’ against each of these.
aCountry A: People who do not accept the country’s official religion
do not have a right to vote.
bCountry B: The same party has been winning elections for the last
twenty years.
cCountry C: Ruling party has lost in the last three elections.
dCountry D: There is no independent election commission.
2 Here is some information about four countries. Based on this
information, how would you classify each of these countries. Write
‘democratic’, ‘undemocratic’ or ‘not sure’ against each of these.
aCountry P: The parliament cannot pass a law about the army
without the consent of the Chief of Army.
bCountry Q: The parliament cannot pass a law reducing the powers
of the judiciary.
cCountry R: The country’s leaders cannot sign any treaty with
another country without taking permission from its neighbouring
country.
dCountry S: All the major economic decisions about the country
are taken by officials of the central bank which the ministers cannot
change.
3 Which of these is not a good argument in favour of democracy? Why?
aPeople feel free and equal in a democracy.
bDemocracies resolve conflict in a better way than others.
cDemocratic government is more accountable to the people.
dDemocracies are more prosperous than others.exercisesThis also means that no country
is a perfect democracy. The features
of democracy that we discussed in
this chapter provide only the
minimum conditions of a
democracy. That does not make it
an ideal democracy. Every
democracy has to try to realise the
ideals of a democratic decision-
making. This cannot be achieved
once and for all. This requires a
constant effort to save and
strengthen democratic forms of
decision-making. What we do as
citizens can make a difference to
making our country more or less
democratic. This is the strength andthe weakness of democracy: the fate
of the country depends not just on
what the rulers do, but mainly on
what we, as citizens, do.
This is what distinguished
democracy from other governments.
Other forms of government like
monarchy, dictatorship or one-party
rule do not require all citizens to
take part in politics. In fact most
non-democratic governments
would like citizens not to take part
in politics. But democracy depends
on active political participation by
all the citizens. That is why a study
of democracy must focus on
democratic politics.
2024-25
---
16 DEMOCRA TIC POLITICS4 Each of these statements contains a democratic and an undemocratic
element. Write out the two separately for each statement.
aA minister said that some laws have to be passed by the parliament
in order to conform to the regulations decided by the World Trade
Organisation (WTO).
bThe Election Commission ordered re-polling in a constituency
where large-scale rigging was reported.
cWomen’s representation in the parliament has barely reached 10
per cent. This led women’s organisations to demand one-third seats
for women.
5 Which of these is not a valid reason for arguing that there is a lesser
possibility of famine in a democratic country?
aOpposition parties can draw attention to hunger and starvation.
bFree press can report suffering from famine in different parts of
the country.
cGovernment fears its defeat in the next elections.
dPeople are free to believe in and practise any religion.
6 There are 40 villages in a district where the government has made
no provision for drinking water. These villagers met and considered
many methods of forcing the government to respond to their need.
Which of these is not a democratic method?
aFiling a case in the courts claiming that water is part of right to life.
bBoycotting the next elections to give a message to all parties.
cOrganising public meetings against government’s policies.
dPaying money to government officials to get water.
7 Write a response to the following arguments against democracy:
aArmy is the most disciplined and corruption-free organisation in
the country. Therefore army should rule the country.
bRule of the majority means the rule of ignorant people. What we
need is the rule of the wise, even if they are in small numbers.
cIf we want religious leaders to guide us in spiritual matters, why
not invite them to guide us in politics as well. The country should
be ruled by religious leaders.
8 Are the following statements in keeping with democracy as a
value? Why?
aFather to daughter: I don’t want to hear your opinion about your
marriage. In our family children marry where the parents tell them
to.
bTeacher to student: Don’t disturb my concentration by asking me
questions in the classroom.
cEmployee to the officer: Our working hours must be reduced
according to the law.
9 Consider the following facts about a country and decide if you would
call it a democracy. Give reasons to support your decision.
exercises
2024-25
---
17exercises
 aAll the citizens of the country have right to vote. Elections are held
regularly.
bThe country took loan from international agencies. One of the
conditions for giving loan was that the government would reduce
its expenses on education and health.
cPeople speak more than seven languages but education is available
only in one language, the language spoken by 52 percent people
of that country.
dSeveral organisations have given a call for peaceful demonstrations
and nation wide strikes in the country to oppose these policies.
Government has arrested these leaders.
eThe government owns the radio and television in the country. All
the newspapers have to get permission from the government to
publish any news about government’s policies and protests.
10 In 2004 a report published in USA pointed to the increasing
inequalities in that country. Inequalities in income reflected in the
participation of people in democracy. It also shaped their abilities to
influence the decisions taken by the government. The report
highlighted that:
/UIstopIf an average Black family earns $ 100 then the income of average
White family is $ 162. A White family has twelve times more wealth
than the average Black family.
/UIstopIn a President’s election ‘nearly 9 out of 10 individuals in families
with income over $ 75,000 have voted. These people are the top
20% of the population in terms of their income. On the other hand
only 5 people out of 10 from families with income less than $
15,000 have voted. They are the bottom 20% of the population in
terms of their income.
/UIstopAbout 95% contribution to the political parties comes from the
rich. This gives them opportunity to express their opinions and
concerns, which is not available to most citizens.
/UIstopAs poor sections participate less in politics, the government does
not listen to their concerns – coming out of poverty, getting job,
education, health care and housing for them. Politicians hear most
regularly about the concerns of business persons and the rich.
Write an essay on ‘Democracy and Poverty’ using the information
given in this report but using examples from India.
Most newspapers have an editorial page. On that page the newspaper
publishes its own opinions about current affairs. The paper also publishes
the views of other writers and intellectuals and letters written by the
readers. Follow any one newspaper for one month and collect editorials,
articles and letters on that page that have anything to do with democracy.
Classify these into the following categories:
/UIstopConstitutional and legal aspects of democracy
/UIstopCitizens’ rights
/UIstopElectoral and party politics
/UIstopCriticism of democracy
WHAT IS DEMOCRAC Y? W HY DEMOCRAC Y?
2024-25
---
18 DEMOCRA TIC POLITICS
CHAPTER 2
CONSTITUTI ONAL
DESIGN
OVERVIEW
We noted in the previous chapter that in a democracy the rulers are not
free to do what they like. There are certain basic rules that the citizens
and the government have to follow. All such rules together are called
constitution. As the supreme law of the country, the constitution determines
the rights of citizens, the powers of the government and how the government
should function.
In this chapter we ask some basic questions about the constitutional
design of a democracy. Why do we need a constitution? How are the
constitutions drawn up? Who designs them and in what way? What are
the values that shape the constitutions in democratic states? Once a
constitution is accepted, can we make changes later as required by the
changing conditions?
One recent instance of designing constitution for a democratic state is
that of South Africa. We begin this chapter by looking at what happened
there and how the South Africans went about this task of designing their
constitution. Then we turn to how the Indian Constitution was made,
what its foundational values are, and how it provides a good framework
for the conduct of citizens’ life and that of the government.
2024-25
---
19
2.1DEMOCRA TIC CONSTITUTI ON IN
SOUTH  AFRIC A
“I have fought against white domination
and I have fought against black
domination. I have cherished the ideal of
a democratic and free society in which all
persons live together in harmony and with
equal opportunities. It is an ideal which I
hope to live for and to achieve. But if
needs be, it is an ideal for which I am
prepared to die. ”
This was Nelson Mandela, being
tried for treason
 by the white South
African government. He and seven
other leaders were sentenced to life
imprisonment in 1964 for daring to
oppose the apartheid  regime in his
country. He spent the next 27 years
in South Africa’s most dreaded
prison, Robben Island.
S SS SStr trtr trtruggle against aparuggle against aparuggle against aparuggle against aparuggle against apar theid theidtheid theidtheid
Apartheid was the name of a system
of racial discrimination unique to
South Africa. The white Europeans
imposed this system on South
Africa. During the seventeenth  and
eighteenth  centuries, the trading
companies from Europe occupied it
with arms and force, in the way they
occupied India. But unlike India, a
large number of ‘whites’ had settled
in South Africa and became the
local rulers. The system ofapartheid divided the people and
labelled  them on the basis of their
skin colour. The native people of
South Africa are black in colour.
They made up  about three-fourth
of the population and  were  called
‘blacks’. Besides these two groups,
there were people of mixed races
who were called ‘coloured’ and
people who migrated from India.
The white rulers treated all non-
whites as inferiors. The non-whites
did not have voting rights.
The apartheid system was
particularly oppressive for the
blacks. They were forbidden from
living in white areas. They could
work in white areas only if they had
a permit. Trains, buses, taxis,
hotels, hospitals, schools and
colleges, libraries, cinema halls,
theatres, beaches, swimming pools,
CONSTITUTI ONAL DESIGN
Sign on Durban beach
in English, Afrikaans
and Zulu
In English it reads:
‘CITY OF DURBAN  Under
section 37 of the Durban
beach by-laws, this bathing
area is reser ved for the sole
use of members of the
white race group’.1
21
2A signboard emblematic of
the tense relations of the
apartheid era, 1953.Nelson MandelaSouth Africa History Online
John Mullen, Wikipedia , GNU F ree Documentation License
2024-25
---
20 DEMOCRA TIC POLITICS
public toilets, were all separate for
the whites and blacks. This was
called segregation. They could not
even visit the churches where the
whites worshipped. Blacks could not
form associations or protest against
the terrible treatment.
Since 1950, the blacks, coloured
and Indians fought against the
apartheid system. They launched
protest marches and strikes. The
African National Congress (ANC) was
the umbrella organisation that led
the struggle against the policies of
segregation. This included many
workers’ unions and the Communist
Party. Many sensitive whites also
joined the ANC to oppose apartheid
and played a leading role in this
struggle. Several countries de-
nounced apartheid as unjust and
racist. But the white racist govern-
ment continued to rule by detain-
ing, torturing and killing thousands
of black and coloured people.
ACTIVITY
/UIstopMake a poster on the life and str uggle of Nelson
Mandela.
/UIstopIf available, read some por tions of his autobi-
ography , The L ong W alk to Freedom, in the
classroom.
T TT TTo oo oow ww wwar arar arards a ne ds a neds a ne ds a neds a ne w c w cw c w cw constitution onstitutiononstitution onstitutiononstitution
As protests and struggles against
apartheid had increased, the
government realised that they could
no longer keep the blacks under
their rule through repression. The
white regime changed its policies.
Discriminatory laws were repealed.
Ban on political parties and
restrictions on the media were lifted.
After 28 years of imprisonment,
Nelson Mandela walked out of the
jail as a free man. Finally, at the
midnight of 26 April 1994, the newnational flag of the Republic of South
Africa was unfurled marking the
newly born democracy in the world.
The apartheid government came to
an end, paving way for the formation
of a multi-racial government.
How did this come about? Let us
hear Mandela, the first president of
this new South Africa, on this extra-
ordinary transition:
“Historical enemies succeeded in
negotiating a peaceful transition from
apartheid to democracy exactly because
we were prepared to accept the inherent
capacity for goodness in the other. My
wish is that South Africans never give up
on the belief in goodness, that they
cherish that faith in human beings is the
cornerstone of our democracy.”
After the emergence of the new
democratic South Africa, black
leaders appealed to fellow blacks to
forgive the whites for the atrocities
they had committed while in power.
They said let us build a new South
Africa based on equality of all races
and men and women, on democratic
values, social justice and human
rights. The party that ruled through
oppression and brutal killings and
the party that led the freedom
struggle sat together to draw up a
common constitution .
After two years of discussion and
debate they came out with one of the
finest constitutions the world has
ever had. This constitution gave to
its citizens the most extensive rights
available in any country. Together,
they decided that in the search for
a solution to the problems, nobody
should be excluded, no one should
be treated as a demon. They agreed
that everybody should become part
of the solution, whatever they might
have done or represented in the
past. The preamble  to the South
African Constitution (see page 28)
sums up this spirit.What would have
happened in South
Africa if the black
majority had
decided to take
revenge on the
whites for all their
oppression and
exploitation?
2024-25
---
21
The South African constitution
inspires democrats all over the
world. A state denounced by the
entire world till 1994 as the most
undemocratic one is now seen as a
model of democracy. What made this
change possible was the
determination of the people of South
Africa to work together, to transform
bitter experiences into the binding
glue of a rainbow nation. Speaking
on the South African Constitution,
Mandela said:
“The Constitution of South Africa speaks
of both the past and the future. On the one
hand, it is a solemn pact in which we, as
South Africans, declare to one another that
we shall never permit a repetition of our
racist, brutal and repressive past. But it is
more than that. It is also a charter for the
transformation of our country into one
which is truly shared by all its people — a
country which in the fullest sense belongs
to all of us, black and white, women and
men.”
This image captures the spirit of South Africa today . South
Africans call themselves a ‘rainbow nation’. Can you guess
why?
Does the story of South African struggle for freedom remind you of the Indian national movement? Make
a list of similarities and dissimilarities between the two on the following points:
/UIstopNature of colonialism
/UIstopRelationship between different communities
/UIstopLeadership: Gandhi/ Mandela
/UIstopParty that led the str uggle: African National Congress/ Indian National Congress
/UIstopMethod of str uggle
2.2 WHY  DO WE NEED A CONSTITUTION ?
CHECK
YOUR
PROGRESS
The South African example is a good
way to understand why we need a
constitution and what do
constitutions do. The oppressor and
the oppressed in this new democracy
were planning to live together as
equals. It was not going to be easy for
them to trust each other. They hadtheir fears. They wanted to safeguard
their interests. The black majority
was keen to ensure that the
democratic principle of majority rule
was not compromised. They wanted
substantial social and economic
rights. The white minority was keen
to protect its privileges and property.
CONSTITUTI ONAL DESIGN
Wikipedia , GNU F ree Documentation License
For more details about South Africa, visit https://www.gov.za
2024-25
---
22 DEMOCRA TIC POLITICS
After long negotiations both parties
agreed to a compromise. The whites
agreed to the principle of majority
rule and that of one person one vote.
They also agreed to accept some
basic rights for the poor and the
workers. The blacks agreed that
majority rule would not be absolute.
They agreed that the majority would
not take away the property of the white
minority. This compromise was not
easy. How was this compromise going
to be implemented? Even if they
managed to trust each other, what
was the guarantee that this trust will
not be broken in future?
The only way to build and
maintain trust in such a situation
is to write down some rules of the
game that everyone would abide by.
These rules lay down how the rulers
are to be chosen in future. These
rules also determine what the
elected governments are empowered
to do and what they cannot do.
Finally these rules decide the rights
of the citizen. These rules will work
only if the winner cannot change
them very easily. This is what the
South Africans did. They agreed on
some basic rules. They also agreed
that these rules will be supreme,
that no government will be able to
ignore these. This set of basic rules
is called a constitution.
Constitution making is not unique
to South Africa. Every country has
diverse groups of people. Their
relationship may not have been as
bad as that between the whites and
the blacks in South Africa. But all over
the world people have differences of
opinion and interests. Whether
democratic or not, most countries in
the world need to have these basic
rules. This applies not just to
governments. Any association needs
to have its constitution. It could be a
club in your area, a cooperativesociety or a political party, they all
need a constitution.
ACTIVITY
Approach a club or cooperative society or union or
political par ty in your locality . Get a copy of their
rule book (it is of ten called R ules of Association)
and read it. Are these r ules in accordance with
principles of democracy? Do they give membership
to any person without discrimination?
Thus, the constitution of a country
is a set of written rules that are
accepted by all people living together
in a country. Constitution is the
supreme law that determines the
relationship among people living in
a territory (called citizens) and also
the relationship between the people
and government. A constitution does
many things:
/UIstopFirst, it generates a degree of trust
and coordination that is necessary
for different kind of people to live
together;
/UIstopSecond, it specifies how the
government will be constituted,
who will have power to take which
decisions;
/UIstopThird, it lays down limits on the
powers of the government and tells
us what the rights of the citizens
are; and
/UIstopFourth, it expresses the
aspirations of the people about
creating a good society.
All countries that have constitutions
are not necessarily democratic. But
all countries that are democratic will
have constitutions. After the War of
Independence against Great Britain,
the Americans gave themselves a
constitution. After the Revolution, the
French people approved a democratic
constitution. Since then it has
become a practice in all democracies
to have a written constitution.This is not fair!
What was the point
in having a
Constituent
Assembly in India if
all the basics were
already decided?
2024-25
---
23
 CONSTITUTI ONAL DESIGN2.3 M AKING  OF THE INDIAN  CONSTITUTION
like. Much of this consensus had
evolved during the freedom struggle.
Our national movement was not
merely a struggle against a foreign
rule. It was also a struggle to
rejuvenate our country and to
transform our society and politics.
There were sharp differences of
opinion within the freedom struggle
about the path India should take
after Independence. Such
differences exist even today. Yet
some basic ideas had come to be
accepted by almost everyone.
As far back as in 1928, Motilal
Nehru and eight other Congress
leaders drafted a constitution for
India. In 1931, the resolution at the
Karachi session of the Indian
National Congress dwelt on how
independent India’s constitution
should look like. Both these
documents were committed  to the
inclusion of universal adult franchise,
right to freedom and equality and to
protecting the rights of minorities in
the constitution of independent India.
Thus some basic values were
accepted by all leaders much before
the Constituent Assembly  met to
deliberate on the Constitution.
The familiarity with political
institutions of colonial rule also
helped develop an agreement over
the institutional design. The British
rule had given voting rights only to
a few. On that basis the British had
introduced very weak legislatures.
Elections were held in 1937 to
Provincial Legislatures and
Ministries all over British India.
These were not fully democratic
governments. But the experience
gained by Indians in the working of
the legislative institutions proved to
be very useful for the country in
setting up its own institutions andLike South Africa, India’s
Constitution was also drawn up
under very difficult circumstances.
The making of the constitution for a
huge and diverse country like India
was not an easy affair. At that time
the people of India were emerging
from the status of subjects to that
of citizens. The country was born
through a partition on the basis of
religious differences. This was a
traumatic experience for the people
of India and Pakistan.
Atleast ten lakh people were killed
on both sides of the border in
partition related violence. There was
another problem. The British had
left it to the rulers of the princely
states to decide whether they
wanted to merge with India or with
Pakistan or remain independent.
The merger of these princely states
was a difficult and uncertain task.
When the constitution was being
written, the future of the country did
not look as secure as it does today.
The makers of the constitution had
anxieties about the present and the
future of the country.
ACTIVITY
Speak to your grandparents or some other elders
in your locality . Ask them if they have any memor y
of par tition or independence or the making of the
constitution. What were their fears and hopes
about the countr y at that time? Discuss these in
the classroom.
T TT TThe pa he pahe pa he pahe pa th t th tth t th tth t o C o Co C o Co Constitution onstitutiononstitution onstitutiononstitution
Despite all these difficulties, there
was one big advantage for the
makers of the Indian Constitution.
Unlike South Africa, they did not
have to create a consensus about
what a democratic India should lookVallabhbhai VallabhbhaiVallabhbhai VallabhbhaiVallabhbhai
Jhaverbhai PJhaverbhai PJhaverbhai PJhaverbhai PJhaverbhai P atel atelatel atelatel
(1875-1950) born: Gujarat.
Minister of Home,
Information and
Broadcasting in the Interim
Government. Lawyer and
leader of Bardoli peasant
satyagraha. Played a
decisive role in the
integration of the Indian
princely states. Later:
Deputy Prime Minister.
Abul Kalam AzadAbul Kalam AzadAbul Kalam AzadAbul Kalam AzadAbul Kalam Azad
(1888-1958)
born: Saudi Arabia.
Educationist, author and
theologian; scholar of
Arabic. Congress leader,
active in the national
movement. Opposed
Muslim separatist politics.
Later: Education Minister in
the first union cabinet.
T TT TT.T .T.T .T.T.Krishnamachari.Krishnamachari.Krishnamachari.Krishnamachari.Krishnamachari
(1899-1974)
born: T amil Nadu.
Member , Drafting
Committee. Entr epreneur
and Congr ess leader . Later:
Finance Minister in the
Union Cabinet.
All sketches by Rajeev K umar
2024-25
---
24 DEMOCRA TIC POLITICS
working in them. That is why the
Indian constitution adopted many
institutional details and procedures
from colonial laws like the Government
of India Act , 1935.
Years of thinking and deliberation
on the framework of the constitution
had another benefit. Our leaders
gained confidence to learn from
other countries, but on our own
terms. Many of our leaders were
inspired by the ideals of French
Revolution, the practice of
parliamentary democracy in Britain
and the Bill of Rights in the US. The
socialist revolution in Russia had
inspired many Indians to think of
shaping a system based on social
and economic equality. Yet they
were not simply imitating what
others had done. At each step they
were questioning whether these
things suited our country. All these
factors contributed to the making of
our Constitution.
T TT TThe C he Che C he Che C onstituen onstituenonstituen onstituenonstituen t A t At A t At Assembly ssemblyssembly ssemblyssembly
Who, then, were the makers of the
Indian Constitution? You will find
here very brief sketch of some of the
leaders who played an important
role in making the Constitution.
ACTIVITY
Find out more about any member of the
Constituent Assembly from your state or region
who is not mentioned here. Collect a photograph
or make a sketch of that leader . Write a shor t
note on him or her , following the same style as
used here: Name (year of bir th-year of death),
place of bir th (by cur rent political boundaries),
brief description of political activities; role played
after the Constituent Assembly .
The drafting of the document called
the constitution was done by an
assembly of elected representativescalled the Constituent Assembly.
Elections to the Constituent
Assembly were held in July 1946. Its
first meeting was held in December
1946. Soon after, the country was
divided into India and Pakistan. The
Constituent Assembly was also
divided into the Constituent Assembly
of India and that of Pakistan. The
Constituent Assembly that wrote
the Indian constitution had 299
members. The Assembly adopted
the Constitution on 26 November
1949 but it came into effect on 26
January 1950. To mark this day we
celebrate January 26 as Republic
Day every year.
Why should we accept the
Constitution made by this Assembly
more than seven decades ago? We
have already noted one reason
above. The Constitution does not
reflect the views of its members
alone. It expresses a broad
consensus of its time. Many
countries of the world have had to
rewrite their Constitution afresh
because the basic rules were not
acceptable to all major social groups
or political parties. In some other
countries, the Constitution exists
as a mere piece of paper. No one
actually follows it. The experience
of our Constitution is different. Over
the last half a century, several
groups have questioned some
provisions of the Constitution. But
no large social group or political
party has ever questioned the
legitimacy of the Constitution itself.
This is an unusual achievement for
any constitution.
The second reason for accepting
the Constitution is that the
Constituent Assembly represented
the people of India. There was no
universal adult franchise at that
time. So the Constituent Assembly
could not have been chosen directly
by all the people of India. It wasRajendra PrasadRajendra PrasadRajendra PrasadRajendra PrasadRajendra Prasad
(1884-1963) born: Bihar.
President of the Constituent
Assembly. Lawyer, known
for his role in the
Champaran satyagraha. Three
times the president of
Congress. Later: the first
President of India.
H. C. MookherjeeH. C. MookherjeeH. C. MookherjeeH. C. MookherjeeH. C. Mookherjee
(1887-1956)
born: Bengal.
Vice-Chairman of the
Constituent Assembly .
Reputed author and
educationist. Congr ess
leader . Member of All India
Christian Council and
Bengal L egislative
Assembly . Later: Governor
of West Bengal.Jaipal Singh Jaipal SinghJaipal Singh Jaipal SinghJaipal Singh
(1903-1970)
born: Jharkhand
A spor tsman and
educationist. Captain of the
first national Hockey team.
Founder Pr esident of
Adivasi Maha Sabha. L ater:
founder of Jharkhand P arty.
2024-25
---
25
CHECK
YOUR
PROGRESSelected mainly by the members of
the existing Provincial Legislatures
that we mentioned above. This
ensured a fair geographical share of
members from all the regions of the
country. The Assembly was
dominated by the Indian National
Congress, the party that led India’s
freedom struggle. But the Congress
itself included a variety of political
groups and opinions. The Assembly
had many members who did not
agree with the Congress. In social
terms too, the Assembly represented
members from different language
groups, castes, classes, religions
and occupations. Even if the
Constituent Assembly was elected
by universal adult franchise, its
composition would not have been
very different.
Finally, the manner in which the
Constituent Assembly worked gives
sanctity to the Constitution. TheConstituent Assembly worked in a
systematic, open and consensual
manner. First some basic principles
were decided and agreed upon. Then
a Drafting Committee chaired by Dr.
B.R. Ambedkar prepared a draft
constitution for discussion. Several
rounds of thorough discussion took
place on the Draft Constitution,
clause  by clause. More than two
thousand amendments were
considered. The members
deliberated for 114 days spread over
three years. Every document
presented and every word spoken in
the Constituent Assembly has been
recorded and preserved. These are
called ‘Constituent Assembly
Debates’. When printed, these
debates are 12 bulky volumes! These
debates provide the rationale behind
every provision of the Constitution.
These are used to interpret the
meaning of the Constitution.
Read the infor mation about all the makers of the Indian Constitution given in the side columns here. Y ou
don’t need to memorise this infor mation. Just give examples from these to suppor t the following
statements:
1.The Assembly had many members who were not with the Congress
2.The Assembly represented members from different social groups
3.Members of the Assembly believed in different ideologies
2.4 G UIDING VALUES OF THE INDIAN CONSTITUTI ON
In this book we shall study the
exact provisions of the Constitution
on different subjects. At this stage
let us begin by understanding the
overall philosophy  of what our
Constitution is all about. We can do
this in two ways. We can
understand it by reading the views
of some of our major leaders on our
Constitution. But it is equally
important to read what the
Constitution says about its own
philosophy. This is what the
preamble to the Constitution does.Let us turn to these, one by one.
The Dream and the PromiseThe Dream and the PromiseThe Dream and the PromiseThe Dream and the PromiseThe Dream and the Promise
Some of you may have noticed a
name missing from the sketches of
the makers of the constitution:
Mahatma Gandhi. He was not a
member of the Constituent
Assembly. Yet there were many
members who followed his vision.
Years ago, writing in his magazine
Young India  in 1931, he had spelt
out what he wanted the Constitution
to do:Baldev SinghBaldev SinghBaldev SinghBaldev SinghBaldev Singh
( 1901-1961)
born: Haryana.
A successful entrepreneur
and leader of the P anthic
Akali P arty in the P unjab
Assembly. A nominee of
the Congress in the
Constituent Assembly.
Later: Defence Minister in
the Union Cabinet.G. Dur G. DurG. Dur G. DurG. Dur gabai Deshmukhgabai Deshmukhgabai Deshmukhgabai Deshmukhgabai Deshmukh
(1909-1981)
born: Andhra Pradesh.
Advocate and public activist
for women ’s emancipation.
Founder of Andhra Mahila
Sabha. Congr ess leader .
Later: Founder Chairperson
of Central Social W elfare
Board.
CONSTITUTI ONAL DESIGN
2024-25
---
26 DEMOCRA TIC POLITICS
Bhimrao RamjiBhimrao RamjiBhimrao RamjiBhimrao RamjiBhimrao Ramji
Ambedkar AmbedkarAmbedkar AmbedkarAmbedkar
(1891-1956) born: Madhya
Pradesh. Chairman of the
Drafting Committee. Social
revolutionary thinker and
agitator against caste
divisions and caste based
inequalities. Later: Law
minister in the first cabinet
of post-independence India.
Founder of R epublican P arty
of India.
I shall strive for a constitution which will release India from all thralldom
and patronage … I shall work for an India in which the poorest shall feel that it
is their country in whose making they have an effective voice; an India in which
there shall be no high class and low class of people; an India in
which all communities shall liv e in perfect harmony . Ther e
can be no room in such an India for the curse of
untouchability or the curse of the intoxicating drinks
and drugs. W omen will enjoy the same rights as men …
I shall be satisfied with nothing else .
This dream of an India that has
eliminated inequality was shared by
Dr. Ambedkar, who played a key role
in the making of the Constitution but
he had a different understanding ofhow inequalities could be removed. He
often bitterly criticised Mahatma
Gandhi and his vision. In his conclud-
ing speech to the Constituent Assem
bly he stated his anxiety very clearly:
On the 26th of January 1950 we are going to enter a life of contradictions.
In politics we will have equality and in social and economic life we will have
inequality . In politics we will be r ecognising the principle of one man one v ote and
one vote one v alue. In our social and economic life , we shall, by r eason of our
social and economic structur e, continue to deny the principle of one man one
value. How long shall we continue to liv e this life of contr adictions? How long shall
we continue to deny equality in our social and economic life? If we continue to
deny it for long, we will do so only by putting our political democracy in peril.
Finally let us turn to Jawaharlal
Nehru giving his famous speech to theConstituent Assembly at the stroke
of midnight on 15  August  1947:Shyama PrasadShyama PrasadShyama PrasadShyama PrasadShyama Prasad
Mukherjee MukherjeeMukherjee MukherjeeMukherjee
(1901-1953) born: W est
Bengal. Minister for
Industry and Supply in the
Interim Government.
Educationist and lawyer .
Active in Hindu Mahasabha.
Later: Founder Pr esident of
Bharatiya Jansangh.Kanhaiyalal ManiklalKanhaiyalal ManiklalKanhaiyalal ManiklalKanhaiyalal ManiklalKanhaiyalal Maniklal
Munshi MunshiMunshi MunshiMunshi
(1887-1971) born:Gujarat.
Advocate, historian and
linguist. Congr ess leader
and Gandhian. L ater:
Minister in the Union
Cabinet. Founder of the
Swatantra P arty.
2024-25
---
27
CHECK
YOUR
PROGRESSLong years ago we made a tryst with destiny tryst with destinytryst with destiny tryst with destinytryst with destiny , ,, ,, and now the time comes
when we shall r edeem our pledge , not wholly or in full measur e, but very substantially .
At the str oke of the midnight hour , when the world sleeps, India will awak e to life
and freedom. A moment comes, which comes but r arely in history, when we step
out from the old to the new , when an age ends, and when the soul of a nation,
long suppr essed, finds utter ance. It is fitting that at this solemn moment we tak e
the pledge of dedication to the service of India and her people and to the still
larger cause of humanity …
Freedom and power bring r esponsibility . The r esponsibility r ests upon this
Assembly , a sov ereign body r epresenting the sov ereign people of India. Befor e the
birth of freedom we have endured all the pains of labour and our hearts are heavy
with the memory of this sorr ow. Some of those pains continue ev en now. Nevertheless,
the past is ov er and it is the futur e that beck ons to us now .
That future is not one of ease or resting but of incessant striving so that we
may fulfil the pledges we hav e so often tak en and the one we shall tak e today . The
service of India means the service of the millions who suffer . It means the ending
of poverty and ignor ance and disease and inequality of opportunity . The ambition
of the gr eatest man of our gener ation has been to wipe ev ery tear fr om every eye .
That may be beyond us, but as long as there are tears and suffering, so long our
work will not be ov er.
Read the three quotations above carefully .
/UIstopCan you identify one idea that is common to all these three?
/UIstopWhat are the differences in their ways of expressing that common idea?Jawaharlal NehruJawaharlal NehruJawaharlal NehruJawaharlal NehruJawaharlal Nehru
(1889-1964) born:  Uttar
Pradesh. Prime Minister of
the interim government.
Lawyer and Congr ess
leader . Advocate of
socialism, democracy and
anti-imperialism.  Later: First
Prime Minister of India.
Sar SarSar SarSarojini Naidu
ojini Naiduojini Naidu ojini Naiduojini Naidu
(1879-1949)
born:  Andhra Pradesh.
Poet, writer and political
activist. Among the
foremost women leaders in
the Congr ess. L ater:
Governor of Uttar Pradesh.
Somnath L Somnath LSomnath L Somnath LSomnath L ahiri ahiriahiri ahiriahiri
(1901-1984) born:  West
Bengal. W riter and editor .
Leader of the Communist
Party of India. L ater:
Member of W est Bengal
Legislative Assembly .
CONSTITUTI ONAL DESIGN
2024-25
---
28 DEMOCRA TIC POLITICS
in order to form a more perfect union, establish justice, insure domestic
tranquility, provide for the common defense, promote the general welfare, and
secure the blessings of liberty to ourselves and our posterity, do ordain and
establish thisConstitution for the United States of America.
We, the people of South Africa,
Recognise the injustices of our past;
Honour those who suffered for justice and freedom in our land;
Respect those who have worked to build and develop our country; and
Believe that South Africa belongs to all who live in it, united in our diversity .
We therefore, through our freely elected representatives, adopt this Constitution as the supreme law of
the Republic so as to —
Heal the divisions of the past and establish a society based on democratic values, social justice and
fundamental human rights;
Lay the foundations for a democratic and open society in which government is based on the will of
the people and every citizen is equally protected by law;
Improve the quality of life of all citizens and free the potential of each person; and
Build a united and democratic South Africa able to take its rightful place as a sovereign state in the
family of nations.
May God protect our people.
Nkosi Sikelel’ iAfrika. Morena boloka setjhaba sa heso.
God seën Suid-Afrika. God bless South Africa.
Mudzimu fhatutshedza Afurika. Hosi katekisa Afrika.Philosophy of thePhilosophy of thePhilosophy of thePhilosophy of thePhilosophy of theC CC CConstitution onstitutiononstitution onstitutiononstitution
Values that inspired and guided the
freedom struggle and were in turn
nurtured by it, formed the
foundation for India’s democracy.
These values are embedded in the
Preamble of the Indian
Constitution. They guide all the
28articles of the Indian Constitution.
The Constitution begins with a short
statement of its basic values. This
is called the Preamble to the
constitution. Taking inspiration
from American model, most
countries in the contemporary
world have chosen to begin their
constitutions with a preamble.
2024-25
---
29
*
CONSTITUTIONAL  DESIGNREPUBLIC REPUBLICREPUBLIC REPUBLICREPUBLIC
The head of the state
is an elected person
and not a hereditary
position.
JUSTICE JUSTICEJUSTICE JUSTICEJUSTICE
Citizens cannot be
discriminated on the
grounds of caste,
religion and gender .
Social inequalities
have to be reduced.
Government should
work for the welfare
of all, especially of
the disadvantaged
groups.
LIBERTY LIBERTYLIBERTY LIBERTYLIBERTY
There are no
unreasonable
restrictions on the
citizens in what they
think, how they wish to
express their thoughts
and the way they wish
to follow up their
thoughts in action.
EQUALITY EQUALITYEQUALITY EQUALITYEQUALITY
All are equal before
the law . The traditional
social inequalities
have to be ended. The
government should
ensure equal
oppor tunity for all.
FRA FRAFRA FRAFRATERNITY TERNITYTERNITY TERNITYTERNITY
All of us should
behave as if we are
members of the same
family . No one should
treat a fellow citizen
as inferior .WE, THE PEOPLEWE, THE PEOPLEWE, THE PEOPLEWE, THE PEOPLEWE, THE PEOPLE
OF INDIA OF INDIAOF INDIA OF INDIAOF INDIA
The constitution has
been drawn up and
enacted by the people
through their
representatives, and
not handed down to
them by a king or any
outside powers.
SOVEREIGN SOVEREIGNSOVEREIGN SOVEREIGNSOVEREIGN
People have supreme
right to make
decisions on internal
as well as external
matters. No external
power can dictate the
government of India.
SOCIALIST SOCIALISTSOCIALIST SOCIALISTSOCIALIST
Wealth is generated
socially and should be
shared equally by
society . Gover nment
should regulate the
ownership of land and
industry to reduce
socio-economic
inequalities.
SECULAR SECULARSECULAR SECULARSECULAR
Citizens have
complete freedom to
follow any religion.
But there is no official
religion. Government
treats all religious
beliefs and practices
with equal respect.
DEMOCRA DEMOCRADEMOCRA DEMOCRADEMOCRA TIC TICTIC TICTIC
A form of government
where people enjoy
equal political rights,
elect their rulers and
hold them account-
able. The government
is run according to
some basic rules.Let us read the Preamble of our Constitution very
carefully and understand the meaning of each of its
key words.
The Preamble of the Constitution reads like a poem
on democracy. It contains the philosophy on which the
entire Constitution has been built. It provides a standard
to examine and evaluate any law and action of
government, to find out whether it is good or bad. It is
the soul of the Indian Constitution.
Note: *The terms ‘Socialist’ and ‘Secular’ were added in
Preamble through the 42nd Constitutional Amendment
in 1976.
2024-25
---
30 DEMOCRA TIC POLITICS
GLOSSAR Y
Compare the P reambles to the constitutions of the United States of America, India and South Africa.
/UIstopMake a list of ideas that are common to all these three.
/UIstopNote down at least one of the major differences among these.
/UIstopWhich of the three makes a reference to the past?
/UIstopWhich of these does not invoke God?
Institutional designInstitutional designInstitutional designInstitutional designInstitutional design
A constitution is not merely a
statement of values and philosophy.
As we noted above, a constitution is
mainly about embodying these values
into institutional arrangements.
Much of the document called
Constitution of India is about these
arrangements. It is a very long and
detailed document. Therefore it needs
to be amended quite regularly to keep
it updated. Those who crafted the
Indian Constitution felt that it has to
be in accordance with people’s
aspirations and changes in society.
They did not see it as a sacred, static
and unalterable law. So, they made
provisions to incorporate changes
from time to time. These changes are
called constitutional amendments.
The Constitution describes the
institutional arrangements in a very
legal language. If you read the
Constitution for the first time, it canbe quite difficult to understand. Yet
the basic institutional design is not
very difficult to understand. Like any
Constitution, the Indian
Constitution lays down a procedure
for choosing persons to govern the
country. It defines who will have how
much power to take which decisions.
And it puts limits to what the
government can do by providing
some rights to the citizen that
cannot be violated. The remaining
three chapters in this book are about
these three aspects of the working
of Indian constitution. We shall look
at some key constitutional
provisions in each chapter and
understand how they work in
democratic politics. But this
textbook will not cover all the salient
features of the institutional design
in the Indian Constitution. Some
other aspects will be covered in your
textbook next year.
Apartheid : The official policy of racial separation and ill treatment of blacks
followed by the government of South Africa between 1948 and 1989.
Clause : A distinct section of a document.
Constituent Assembly : An assembly of people’s representatives that writes
a constitution for a country.
Constitution : Supreme law of a country, containing fundamental rules
governing the politics and society in a country.
Constitutional amendment: A change in the constitution made by the
supreme legislative body in a country.
Draft : A preliminary version of a legal document.
Philosophy: The most fundamental principles underlying one’s thoughts
and actions.
Preamble: An introductory statement in a constitution which states the
reasons and guiding values of the constitution.
Treason: The offence of attempting to overthrow the government of the
state to which the offender owes allegiance.
Tryst : A meeting or meeting place that has been agreed upon.
CHECK
YOUR
PROGRESS
2024-25
---
31exercises1 Here are some false statements. Identify the mistake in each case
and rewrite these correctly based on what you have read in this
chapter.
aLeaders of the freedom movement had an open mind about whether
the country should be democratic or not after independence.
bMembers of the Constituent Assembly of India held the same views
on all provisions of the Constitution.
cA country that has a constitution must be a democracy.
dConstitution cannot be amended because it is the supreme law of
a country.
2 Which of these was the most salient underlying conflict in the mak-
ing of a democratic constitution in South Africa?
aBetween South Africa and its neighbours
bBetween men and women
cBetween the white majority and the black minority
dBetween the coloured minority and the black majority
3 Which of these is a provision that a democratic constitution does not
have?
aPowers of the head of the state
bName of the head of the state
cPowers of the legislature
dName of the country
4 Match the following leaders with their roles in the making of the
Constitution:
aMotilal Nehru iPresident of the Constituent Assembly
bB.R. Ambedkar iiMember of the Constituent Assembly
cRajendra Prasad iiiChairman of the Drafting Committee
dSarojini Naidu ivPrepared a Constitution for India in 1928
5 Read again the extracts from Nehru’s speech ‘Tryst with Destiny’
and answer the following:
aWhy did Nehru use the expression “not wholly or in full measure”
in the first sentence?
bWhat pledge did he want the makers of the Indian Constitution to
take?
c“The ambition of the greatest man of our generation has been to wipe
every tear from every eye ”. Who was he referring to?
6 Here are some of the guiding values of the Constitution and their
meaning. Rewrite them by matching them correctly.
aSovereign iGovernment will not favour any religion.
bRepublic iiPeople have the supreme right to make decisions.
cFraternity iiiHead of the state is an elected person.
dSecular ivPeople should live like brothers and sisters.
CONSTITUTI ONAL DESIGN
2024-25
---
32 DEMOCRA TIC POLITICSexercises
7 How did your school celebrate the Constitution Day on November
26th? Prepare a brief report.
8 Here are different opinions about what made India a democracy.
How much importance would you give to each of these factors?
aDemocracy in India is a gift of the British rulers. We received training
to work with representative legislative institutions under the British
rule.
bFreedom Struggle challenged the colonial exploitation and denial
of different freedoms to Indians. Free India could not be anything
but democratic.
cWe were lucky to have leaders who had democratic convictions.
The denial of democracy in several other newly independent
countries shows the important role of these leaders.
9 Read the following extract from a conduct book for ‘married women’,
published in 1912. ‘ God has made the female species delicate and fragile
both physically and emotionally, pitiably incapable of self-defence. They are
destined thus by God to remain in male protection – of father, husband and son
– all their lives. Women should, therefore, not despair, but feel obliged that they
can dedicate themselves to the service of men ’. Do you think the values
expressed in this para reflected the values underlying our
constitution? Or does this go against the constitutional values?
10 Read the following statements about a constitution. Give reasons
why each of these is true or not true.
aThe authority of the rules of the constitution is the same as that of
any other law.
bConstitution lays down how different organs of the government will
be formed.
cRights of citizens and limits on the power of the government are
laid down in the constitution.
dA constitution is about institutions, not about values
Follow the newspapers for any report on a discussion on any constitutional
amendment or demand for any constitutional amendment. You could, for
example, focus on the demand for constitutional amendment for reservation
for women in legislatures. Was there a public debate? What reasons were
put forward in favour of the amendment?  How did different parties react to
the constitutional amendment? Did the amendment take place?
2024-25
---
33
Nehru Memorial Museum and Library , New Delhi
2024-25
---
34 DEMOCRA TIC POLITICSOVERVIEW
In Chapter 1 we have seen that in a democracy it is neither possible nor
necessary for people to govern directly. The most common form of
democracy in our times is for the people to govern through their
representatives. In this chapter we will look at how these representatives
are elected. We begin by understanding why elections are necessary and
useful in a democracy. We try to understand how electoral competition
among parties serves the people. We then go on to ask what makes an
election democratic. The basic idea here is to distinguish democratic
elections from non-democratic elections.
The rest of the chapter tries to assess elections in India in the light of
this yardstick. We take a look at each stage of elections, from the drawing
of boundaries of different constituencies to the declaration of results. At
each stage we ask what should happen and what does happen in elections.
Towards the end of the chapter, we turn to an assessment of whether
elections in India are free and fair. Here we also examine the role of the
Election Commission in ensuring free and fair elections.CHAPTER 3
Elec toral
Politics
2024-25
---
35
3.1 W HY ELECTIONS ?
government would waive the loans
of farmers and small businessmen.
He promised that this would be the
first action of his government.
The people were unhappy with the
existing government. They were also
attracted by Devi Lal’s promise. So,
when elections were held, they voted
overwhelmingly in favour of Lok Dal
and its allies. Lok Dal and its
partners won 76 out of 90 seats in
the State Assembly. Lok Dal alone
won 60 seats and thus had a clear
majority in the Assembly. The
Congress could win only 5 seats.
Once the election results were
announced, the sitting Chief
Minister resigned. The newly elected
Members of Legislative Assembly
(MLAs) of Lok Dal chose Devi Lal as
their leader. The Governor invited
Devi Lal to be the new Chief
Minister. Three days after the
election results were declared, he
became the Chief Minister. As soon
as he became the Chief Minister, his
Government issued a Government
Order waiving the outstanding loans
of small farmers, agricultural
labourers and small businessmen.
His party ruled the State for four
years. The next elections were held
in 1991. But this time his party did
not win popular support. The
Congress won the election and
formed the government.Assembly Election inAssembly Election inAssembly Election inAssembly Election inAssembly Election inH HH HHar arar arary yy yyana anaana anaana
Do most leaders
fulfil their election
promises?
Jagdeep and Navpreet read this stor y and drew the following conclusions. Can you say which of
these are right or wrong (or if the infor mation given in the stor y is inadequate to call them right or
wrong):
/UIstopElections can lead to changes in the policy of the gover nment.
/UIstopThe Gover nor invited Devi Lal to become the Chief Minister because he was impressed with his
speeches.
/UIstopPeople are unhappy with ever y ruling par ty and vote against it in the next election.
/UIstopThe par ty that wins the election for ms the gover nment.
/UIstopThis election led to a lot of economic development in Har yana.
/UIstopThe Congress Chief Minister need not have resigned af ter his par ty lost elections.
CHECK
YOUR
PROGRESSThis newspaper report is about the
State assembly election in Haryana
in 1987. The State had been ruled by
a Congress party led government
since 1982. Chaudhary Devi Lal, then
an opposition leader, led a movement
called ‘Nyaya Yudh’ (Struggle for
Justice) and formed a new party, Lok
Dal. His party joined other opposition
parties to form a front against the
Congress in the elections. In the
election campaign, Devi Lal said that
if his party won the elections, hisThe time is after midnight. An expectant
crowd sitting for the past five hours in a
chowk of the town is waiting for its leader
to come. The or ganisers assure and reas-
sure the crowd that he would be here any
moment. The crowd stands up whenever
a passing vehicle comes that way . It
arouses hopes that he has come.
The leader is Mr . Devi Lal, chief of
the Haryana Sangharsh Samiti, who was
to address a meeting in Karnal on Thurs-
day night. The 76-year-old leader , is a
very busy man these days. His day starts
at 8 a.m. and ends after 1 1 p.m. … he
had already addressed nine election
meetings since morning… been con-
stantly addressing public meetings for
the past 23 months and preparing for this
election.
ELECTORAL POLITICS
2024-25
---
36 DEMOCRA TIC POLITICS
ACTIVITY
Do you know when the last Assembly election
was held in your state? Which other elections
have taken place in your locality in the last five
years? Write down the level of elections (National,
Assembly , Panchayat, etc.), when were they held
and the name and designation (MP , MLA, etc.) of
the persons who got elected from your area.
W WW WWh hh hhy do w y do wy do w y do wy do w e nee e neee nee e neee nee d ele d eled ele d eled ele c cc cctions? tions?tions? tions?tions?
Elections take place regularly in
any democracy. There are more than
one hundred countries in the world
in which elections take place to
choose people’s representatives. We
also read that elections are held in
many countries that are not
democratic.
But why do we need elections?
Let us try to imagine a democracy
without elections. A rule of the
people is possible without any
elections if all the people can sit
together everyday and take all the
decisions. But as we have already
seen in Chapter 1, this is not
possible in any large community.
Nor is it possible for everyone to
have the time and knowledge to
take decisions on all matters.
Therefore in most democracies
people rule through their
representatives.
Is there a democratic way of
selecting representatives without
elections? Let us think of a place
where representatives are selected
on the basis of age and experience.
Or a place where they are chosen
on the basis of education or
knowledge. There could be some
difficulty in deciding on who is more
experienced or knowledgable. But let
us say the people can resolve these
difficulties. Clearly, such a place
does not require elections.But can we call this place a
democracy? How do we find out if
the people like their representatives
or not? How do we ensure that these
representatives rule as per the
wishes of the people? How to make
sure that those who the people don’t
like do not remain their
representatives? This requires a
mechanism by which people can
choose their representatives at
regular intervals and change them
if they wish to do so. This
mechanism is called election.
Therefore, elections are considered
essential in our times for any
representative democracy.
In an election the voters make
many choices:
/UIstopThey can choose who will make
laws for them.
/UIstopThey can choose who will form the
government and take major
decisions.
/UIstopThey can choose the party whose
policies will guide the government
and law making.
W WW WWha haha hahat mak t makt mak t makt mak es an ele es an elees an ele es an elees an ele c cc cction tiontion tiontiondemocr democrdemocr democrdemocr a aa aatic? tic?tic? tic?tic?
Elections can be held in many ways.
All democratic countries hold
elections. But most non-democratic
countries also hold some kind of
elections. How do we distinguish
democratic elections from any other
election? We have discussed this
question briefly in Chapter 1. We
discussed many examples of
countries where elections are held
but they can’t really be called
democratic elections. Let us recall
what we learnt there and start with
a simple list of the minimum
conditions of a democratic election:
/UIstopFirst, everyone should be able to
choose. This means that everyone
should have one vote and every
vote should have equal value.We have seen why
democracies need
to have elections.
But why do rulers
in non-democratic
countries need to
hold elections?
2024-25
---
37
/UIstopSecond, there should be
something to choose from. Parties
and candidates should be free to
contest elections and should offer
some real choice to the voters.
/UIstopThird, the choice should be offered
at regular intervals. Elections must
be held regularly after every few
years.
/UIstopFourth, the candidate preferred by
the people should get elected.
/UIstopFifth, elections should be
conducted in a free and fair
manner where people can choose
as they really wish.
These might look like very simple
and easy conditions. But there are
many countries where these are not
fulfilled. In this chapter we will apply
these conditions to the elections held
in our own country to see if we can
call these democratic elections.
I II IIs it good t s it good ts it good t s it good ts it good t o ha o hao ha o hao ha v vv vve political e politicale political e politicale politicalc cc ccompetition? ompetition?ompetition? ompetition?ompetition?
Elections are thus all about political
competition. This competition takes
various forms. The most obvious form
is the competition among political
parties. At the constituency  level, it
takes the form of competition among
several candidates. If there is no
competition, elections will become
pointless.
But is it good to have political
competition? Clearly, an electoral
competition has many demerits. It
creates a sense of disunity and
‘factionalism’ in every locality. You
would have heard of people
complaining of ‘party-politics’ in your
locality. Different political parties and
leaders often level allegations against
one another. Parties and candidates
often use dirty tricks to win elections.
Some people say that this pressure
to win electoral fights does not allow
sensible long-term policies to be
formulated. Some good people whomay wish to serve the country do not
enter this arena. They do not like the
idea of being dragged into unhealthy
competition.
Our Constitution makers were
aware of these problems. Yet they
opted for free competition in
elections as the way to select our
future leaders. They did so because
this system works better in the long
run. In an ideal world all political
leaders know what is good for the
people and are motivated only by a
desire to serve them. Political
competition is not necessary in such
an ideal world. But that is not what
happens in real life. Political leaders
all over the world, like all other
professionals, are motivated by a
desire to advance their political
careers. They want to remain in
power or get power and positions for
themselves.They may wish to serve
the people as well, but it is risky to
depend entirely on their sense of
duty. Besides even when they wish
to serve the people, they may not
know what is required to do so, or
their ideas may not match what the
people really want.
How do we deal with this real life
situation? One way is to try and
improve the knowledge and character
of political leaders. The other and
more realistic way is to  set up a
system where political leaders are
rewarded for serving the people and
punished for not doing so. Who
decides this reward or punishment?
The simple answer is: the people.
This is what electoral competition
does. Regular electoral competition
provides incentives to political
parties and leaders. They know that
if they raise issues that people want
to be raised, their popularity and
chances of victory will increase in
the next elections. But if they fail to
satisfy the voters with their work
they will not be able to win again.Ah! So, elections
are like exams
where politicians
and parties know if
they have passed
or failed. But who
are the examiners?
ELECTORAL POLITICS
2024-25
---
38 DEMOCRA TIC POLITICS
Can we say that Indian elections are
democratic? To answer this question,
let us take a look at how elections are
held in India. Lok Sabha and Vidhan
Sabha (Assembly) elections are held
regularly after every five years. After
five years the term of all the elected
representatives comes to an end. The
Lok Sabha or Vidhan Sabha stands
‘dissolved’. Elections are held in all
constituencies at the same time,
either on the same day or within a
few days. This is called a general
election. Sometimes election is held
only for one constitutency to fill the
vacancy caused by death or
resignation of a member. This iscalled a by-election. In this chapter
we will focus on general elections.
Ele EleEle EleElec cc cct tt ttor oror ororal c al cal c al cal c onstituencies onstituenciesonstituencies onstituenciesonstituencies
You read about the people of
Haryana electing 90 MLAs. You may
have wondered how they did that.
Did every person in Haryana vote for
all the 90 MLAs? You perhaps know
that this is not the case. In our
country we follow an area based
system of representation. The
country is divided into different
areas for purposes of elections.
These areas are called electoral
constitutencies. The voters who live
in an area elect one representative.So if a political party is motivated
only by desire to be in power, even
then it will be forced to serve the
people. This is a bit like the way
market works. Even if a shopkeeper
is interested only in his profit, he is
forced to give good service to thecustomers. If he does not, the
customer will go to some other shop.
Similarly, political competition may
cause divisions and some ugliness,
but it finally helps to force political
parties and leaders to serve the
people.
3.2 W HAT IS OUR SYSTEM  OF ELECTIONS?Read these two car toons carefully . Write the message of each of them in
your own words. Have a discussion in class on which of the two is closer
to the reality in your own locality . Draw a car toon to depict what elections
do to the relationship between voters and political leaders.
rrrrreeeeeaaaaaddddd
ttttthe hehe hehe
cccccaaaaarrrrrtttttoon oonoon oonoonIrfan Khan
2024-25
---
39
GULBARGA LOK SABHA CONSTITUENCYFor Lok Sabha elections, the country
is divided into 543 constituencies.
The representative elected from each
constituency is called a Member of
Parliament or an MP. One of the
features of a democratic election is
that every vote should have equal
value. That is why our Constitution
requires that each constituency
should have a roughly equal
population living within it.
Similarly, each state is divided into
a specific number of Assembly
constituencies. In this case, the
elected representative is called the
Member of Legislative Assembly or
an MLA. Each Parliamentary
GULBARGA (KALABURAGI) DISTRICT
IN KARNA TAKAconstituency has within it several
assembly constituencies. The same
principle applies for Panchayat and
Municipal elections. Each village or
town is divided into several ‘wards’
that are like constituencies. Each
ward elects one member of the
village or the urban local body.
Sometimes these constituencies are
counted as ‘seats’, for each
constituency represents one seat in
the assembly. When we say that ‘Lok
Dal won 60 seats’ in Haryana, it
means that candidates of Lok Dal
won in 60 assembly constituencies
in the state and thus Lok Dal had
60 MLAs in the state assembly.
ELECTORAL POLITICS/UIstopWhy is the boundary of the Gulbarga Lok Sabha
constituency not the same as the district
boundary of Gulbarga (Kalaburagi)? Draw a
similar map for your own Lok Sabha
constituency .
/UIstopHow many Assembly constituencies are there
in the Gulbarga Lok Sabha constituency? Is it
the same in your own Lok Sabha
constituency?
2024-25
---
40 DEMOCRA TIC POLITICSR RR RReser esereser esereser v vv vve ee eed C d Cd C d Cd C onstituenciesonstituenciesonstituenciesonstituenciesonstituencies
Our Constitution entitles every
citizen to elect her/his representative
and to be elected as a representative.
The Constitution makers, however,
were worried that in an open
electoral competition, certain
weaker sections may not stand a good
chance to get elected to the Lok Sabha
and the state Legislative Assemblies.
They may not have the required
resources, education and contacts to
contest and win elections against
others. Those who are influential and
resourceful may prevent them from
winning elections. If that happens,
our Parliament and Assemblies
would be deprived of the voice of a
significant section of our population.
That would make our democracy less
representative and less democratic.
So, the makers of our Constitution
thought of a special system of
reserved constituencies for the
weaker sections. Some constituencies
are reserved for  people who belong
to the Scheduled Castes [SC] and
Scheduled Tribes [ST]. In a SC
reserved constituency only someone
who belongs to the Scheduled
Castes can stand for election.
Similarly only those belonging to the
Scheduled Tribes can contest an
election from a constituency
reserved for ST. Currently, in the
Lok Sabha, 84 seats are reserved for
the Scheduled Castes and 47 for the
Scheduled Tribes (as on  26 January
2019). This number is in proportion
to their share in the total population.
Thus the reserved seats for SC and
ST do not take away the legitimate
share of any other social group.
This system of reservation
was extended later to other
weaker sections at the district and
local level. In many states, seats
in rural (panchayat) and urban
(municipalities and corporations)local bodies are now reserved for
Other Backward Classes (OBC) as
well. However, the proportion of
seats reserved varies from state to
state. Similarly, one-third of the
seats are reserved in rural and
urban local bodies for women
candidates.
V VV VVot otot ototers ersers ersers’ ’’ ’’ list  list list  list list
Once the constituencies are decided,
the next step is to decide who can
and who cannot vote. This decision
cannot be left to anyone till the last
day. In a democratic election, the list
of those who are eligible to vote
is prepared much before the
election and given to everyone. This
list is officially called the Electoral
Roll and is commonly known as the
Voters’ List.
This is an important step for it is
linked to the first condition of a
democratic election: everyone
should get an equal opportunity to
choose representatives. Earlier, we
read about the principle of
universal adult franchise. In
practice it means that everyone
should have one vote and each vote
should have equal value. No one
should be denied the right to vote
without a good reason. Different
citizens differ from one another in
many ways: some are rich, some are
poor; some are highly educated,
some are not so educated or not
educated at all; some are kind,
others are not so kind. But all of
them are human beings with their
own needs and views. That is why
all of them deserve to have an equal
say in decisions that affect them.
In our country, all the citizens aged
18 years and above can vote in an
election. Every citizen has the right
to vote, regardless of his or her caste,
religion or gender. Some criminals
and persons with unsound mind  canDo you know ,  like
in  Panchayats,
one-third of the
seats in Parliament
and Legislative
Assemblies have
also been reserved
for women as per
Nari Shakti Vandan
Adhiniyam, 2023
(Women's
Reservation Act
2023)
2024-25
---
41
TOTAL CONSTITUENCIES 543
GENERAL 412
RESERVED (SC) 84
RESERVED (ST) 47LOK SABHA CONSTITUENCIES
ELECTORAL POLITICSSTATES CONSTITUENCIES
Andhra Pradesh 25
Arunachal Pradesh 2
Assam 14
Bihar 40
Chhattisgarh 11
Goa 2
Gujarat 26
Haryana 10
Himachal Pradesh 4
Jharkhand 14
Karnataka 28
Kerala 20
Madhya Pradesh 29
Maharashtra 48
Manipur 2
Meghalaya 2
Mizoram 1
Nagaland 1
Odisha 21
Punjab 13
Rajasthan 25
Sikkim 1
Tamil Nadu 39
Telangana 17
Tripura 2
Uttar Pradesh 80
Uttarakhand 5
West Bengal 42UNION TERRITORIES
Andaman & Nicobar
Islands 1
Chandigarh 1
Dadra & Nagar Haveli 1
Daman & Diu 1
Delhi 7
Jammu and Kashmir 5
Ladakh 1
Lakshadweep 1
Puducherry 1See the map above and answer the following questions.
/g31What is the number of Lok Sabha constituencies in your state and the
neighbouring two states?
/g31Which states have more than 30 Lok Sabha constituencies?
/g31Why do some states have such a large number of constituencies?
/g31Why are some constituencies small in area while others are ver y big?
/g31Are the constituencies reser ved for the SCs and ST s evenly spread all
over the entire countr y or are there more in some areas?Election Commission of India
2024-25
---
42 DEMOCRA TIC POLITICS
be denied the right to vote, but only
in rare situations. It is the
responsibility of the government to
get the names of all the eligible
voters put on the voters’ list. As new
persons attain voting age names are
added to the voters’ list. Names of
those who move out of a place or
those who are dead are deleted. A
complete revision of the list takes
place every five years. This is done
to ensure that it remains up to date.
In the last few years a new system
of Election Photo Identity Card
[EPIC] has been introduced. The
government has tried to give this
card to every person on the voters
list. The voters are required to carry
this card when they go out to vote,
so that no one can vote for someone
else. But the card is not yet
compulsory for voting. For voting,
the voters can show many other
proofs of identity like the ration card
or the driving licence.
N NN NNomina ominaomina ominaomina tion of candidation of candidation of candidation of candidation of candida t tt ttes eses eses
We noted above that in a democratic
election people should have a real
choice. This happens only when
there are almost no restrictions on
anyone to contest an election. This
is what our system provides. Any-
one who can be a voter can also be-
come a candidate in elections. The
only difference is that in order to be
a candidate the minimum age is 25
years, while it is only 18 years for
being a voter. There are some other
restrictions on criminals etc. but
these apply in very extreme cases.
Political parties nominate their can-
didates who get the party symbol
and support. Party’s nomination is
often called party ‘ticket’.
Every person who wishes to
contest an election has to fill a
‘nomination form’ and give some
money as ‘security deposit’.Recently, a new system of
declaration has been introduced on
direction from the Supreme Court.
Every candidate has to make a legal
declaration, giving full details of :
/UIstopSerious criminal cases pending
against the candidate;
/UIstopDetails of the assets and liabilities
of the candidate and his or her
family; and
/UIstopEducational qualifications of the
candidate.
This information has to be made
public. This provides an opportunity
to the voters to make their decision
on the basis of the information
provided by the candidates.
Why are the
candidates
required to give a
detailed statement
of their property?Educa tional qualif ications forcandida tes
Why is there no educational qualification for
holding such an impor tant position when some
kind of educational qualification is needed for any
other job in the countr y?
/UIstopEducational qualifications are not relevant to
all kinds of jobs. The relevant qualification for
selection to the Indian cricket team, for
example, is not the attainment of educational
degrees but the ability to play cricket well.
Similarly the relevant qualification for being an
MLA or an MP is the ability to understand
people’s concer ns, problems and to represent
their interests. Whether they can do so or not
is examined by lakhs of examiners — their
voters — af ter ever y five years.
/UIstopEven if education was relevant, it should be
left to the people to decide how much
impor tance they give to educational
qualifications.
/UIstopIn our countr y putting an educational
qualification would go against the spirit of
democracy for yet another reason. It would
mean depriving a majority of the countr y’s
citizens the right to contest elections. If , for
example, a graduate degree like B.A ., B.Com
or B.Sc was made compulsor y for candidates,
more than 90 per cent of the citizens will
become ineligible to contest elections.
2024-25
---
44 DEMOCRA TIC POLITICS
Election CampaignElection CampaignElection CampaignElection CampaignElection Campaign
The main purpose of election is to
give people a chance to choose the
representatives, the government and
the policies they prefer. Therefore it
is necessary to have a free and open
discussion about who is a better
representative, which party will
make a better government or what
is a good policy. This is what happens
during election campaign s.
In our country such campaign s
take place for a two-week period
between the announcement of the
final list of candidates and the date
of polling.  During this period the
candidates contact their voters,
political leaders address election
meetings and political parties
mobilise their supporters. This is
also the period when newspapers
and television news are full of
election related stories and debates.
But election campaign is not limited
to these two weeks only. Political
parties start preparing for election s
months before the y actually take
place.
ACTIVITY
How was the election campaign in your
constituency in the last Lok Sabha elections?
Prepare a list of what the candidates and par ties
said and did.In election campaigns, political
parties try to focus public attention on
some big issues. They want to attract
the public to that issue and get them
to vote for their party on that basis. Let
us look at some of the successful
slogans given by different political
parties in various elections.
/g31The Congress party led by Indira
Gandhi gave the slogan of Garibi
Hatao (Remove poverty ) in the
Lok Sabha elections of 1971. The
party promised to reorient all the
policies of the government to
remove poverty from the country.
/g31Save Democracy  was the slogan
given by Janata Party under the
leadership of Jayaprakash Narayan,
in the Lok Sabha election held in
1977.  The party promised to undo
the excesses committed during
Emergency and restore civil
liberties.
/g31The Left Front used the slogan of
Land to the Tiller  in the West
Bengal Assembly elections held in
1977.
/g31‘Protect the Self-Respect of the
Telugus ’ was the slogan used by N.
T. Rama Rao, the leader of the
Telugu Desam Party in Andhra
Pradesh Assembly elections in
1983.
In a democracy it is best to leave
political parties and candidates free
to conduct their election campaigns
the way they want to. But it is
sometimes necessary to regulateMatch the following features of our electoral system with the principles they reflect.
Principles Features of election system
Each constituency has roughly the same population
Everyone who is 18 years of age or older has a right to vote
Anyone can for m a par ty or contest elections
Reservation of seats for the SCs and the ST s
Universal adult franchise
Representation of
weaker sections
Open political competition
One vote one value
CHECK
YOUR
PROGRESS
2024-25
---
45
campaigns to ensure that every
political party and candidate gets a
fair and equal chance to compete.
According to our election law, no
party or candidate can:
<Bribe or threaten voters;
<Appeal to them in the name of
caste or religion;
<Use government resources for
election campaign; and
<Spend more than ` 25 lakh in a
constituency for a Lok Sabha election
or ` 10 lakh in a  constituency in an
Assembly  election.
If they do so, their election can be
rejected by the court even after they
have been declared elected. In
addition to the laws, all the political
parties in our country have agreed
to a Model Code of Conduct  for
election campaigns. According to
this, no party or candidate can:
<Use any place of worship for
election propaganda;<Use government vehicles, aircrafts
and officials for elections; and
<Once elections are announced,
Ministers shall not lay foundation
stones of any projects, take any big
policy decisions or make any
promises of providing public facilities.
P PP PPolling and c olling and colling and c olling and colling and c oun ounoun ounoun ting of v ting of vting of v ting of vting of v ot otot ototes eses eses
The final stage of an election is the
day when the voters cast or ‘poll’
their vote. That day is usually called
the election day. Every person whose
name is on the voters’ list can go to
a nearby ‘polling booth’, situated
usually in a local school or a
government office. Once the voter
goes inside the booth, the election
officials identify her, put a mark on
her finger and allow her to cast her
vote. An agent of each candidate is
allowed to sit inside the polling
booth and ensure that the voting
takes place in a fair way.
ELECTORAL POLITICSAre the ele ctions too e xpensiv efor our c ountry?
A large amount of money is spent in conducting
elections in India. F or instance, the gover nment
spent about `3,500 crores in conducting Lok Sabha
elections in 2014. That works out to about `40 per
person on the voters’ list. The amount spent by
parties and candidates was more than what the
government spent. Roughly speaking, the
expenditure made by gover nment, par ties and
candidates was around `30,000 crores or `500
per voter .
Some people say that elections are a burden
on our people, that our poor countr y cannot afford
to hold elections once ever y five years. Let us
compare this expenditure with some other figures:
<In 2005, our gover nment decided to buy six
nuclear submarines from F rance. Each subma-
rine cost about `3,000 crores.
<Delhi hosted the Commonwealth Games in
2010. The estimate for its cost is around
`20,000 crores.
Are the elections too expensive? Y ou decide.
2024-25
---
46 DEMOCRA TIC POLITICS
Earlier the voters used to indicate
who they wanted to vote for by putting
a stamp on the ballot paper. A ballot
paper is a sheet of paper on which
the names of the contesting
candidates along with party name
and symbols are listed. Nowadays
electronic voting machines (EVM) are
used to record votes. The machine
shows the names of the candidates
and the party symbols. Independent
candidates too have their own
symbols, allotted by election commission.
All that the voter has to do is to press
the button against the name of the
candidate she wants to give her vote.
Once the polling is over, all the
EVMs are sealed and taken to aWhy are party
agents present in
the polling booth
and the counting
centre?Election result in Gulbarga
Let us go back to our example of Gulbarga. In 2014, a total of 8 candidates contested elections in that
constituency . The total eligible voters were 17.21 lakhs. Of these 9.98 lakh voters had cast their votes.
The candidate of the Congress par ty, Mallikarjun Kharge secured about 5.07 lakh votes. This was 50.82
percent of the total votes polled. But since he had secured more votes than anyone else, he was
declared elected a Member of P arliament from Gulbarga Lok Sabha constituency .
Election R esult of Gulbarga constituency , GENERAL  ELECTION  TO LOK SABHA, 2014
CANDIDA TE PARTY VOTES POLLED % OF VOTES
D.G. Sagar JD(S) 1.57
Mallikarjun Kharge INC 50.82
Danni Mahadev B. BSP 1.14
Revunaik Belamagi BJP 43.33
B.T. Lalitha Naik AAAP 0.91
S.M. Sharma SUCI 0.50
Shankar Jadhav BHPP 0.29
Ramu IND 0.41
None of the Above NOTA 0.99
CHECK
YOUR
PROGRESSIdentify the fair and the unfair electoral practices among the following:
/UIstopA minister flags off a new train in his constituency a week before polling day .
/UIstopA candidate promises that she will get a new train for her constituency if she is elected.
/UIstopSuppor ters of a candidate take the voters to a temple and make them take an oath that they
will vote for him.
/UIstopThe suppor ters of a candidate distribute blankets in slums in retur n for a promise for vote.15690
507193
11428
432460
9074
4943
2877
4085
9888
secure place. A few days later, on a
fixed date, all the EVMs from a
constituency are opened and the
votes secured by each candidate are
counted. The agents of all candidates
are present there to ensure that the
counting is done properly. The
candidate who secures the highest
number of votes from a constituency
is declared elected. In a general
election, usually the counting of votes
in all the constituencies takes place
at the same time, on the same day.
Television channels, radio and
newspapers report this event. Within
a few hours of counting, all the results
are declared and it becomes clear as
to who will form the next government.
/UIstopWhat is the percentage of voters who had actually cast their votes?
/UIstopTo win an election is it necessar y for a person to secure more than half the votes polled?
2024-25
---
47
3.3WHAT MAKES ELECTIONS IN INDIA
DEMOCRA TIC?
Election Commissioner (CEC) is
appointed by the President of India.
But once appointed, the Chief
Election Commissioner is not
answerable to the President or the
government. Even if the ruling party
or the government does not like what
the Commission does, it is virtually
impossible for it to remove the CEC.
Very few election commissions in
the world  have such wide-ranging
powers as the Election Commission
of India.
/UIstopEC takes decisions on every aspect
of conduct and control of elections
from the announcement of
elections to the declaration of
results.
/UIstopIt implements the Code of
Conduct and punishes any
candidate or party that violates it.
/UIstopDuring the election period, the EC
can order the government to follow
some guidelines, to prevent use
and misuse of governmental power
to enhance its chances to win
elections, or to transfer some
government officials.
/UIstopWhen on election duty, govern-
ment officers work under the con-
trol of the EC and not the govern-
ment.
In the last 25 years or so, the
Election Commission has begun to
exercise all its powers and even
expand them. It is very common now
for the Election Commission to
reprimand the government and
administration for their lapses. When
election officials come to the opinion
that polling was not fair in some booths
or even an entire constituency, they
order a repoll. The ruling parties often
do not like what the EC does. But they
have to ob ey. This would not have
happened if the EC was not
independent and powerful.
ELECTORAL POLITICSWe get to read a lot about unfair
practices in elections. Newspapers
and television reports often refer to
such allegations. Most of these
reports are about the following:
/UIstopInclusion of false names and
exclusion of genuine names in the
voters’ list;
/UIstopMisuse of government facilities
and officials by the ruling party;
/UIstopExcessive use of money by rich
candidates and big parties; and
/UIstopIntimidation of voters and rigging
on the polling day.
Many of these reports are correct.
We feel unhappy when we read or
see such reports. But fortunately
they are not on such a scale so as to
defeat the very purpose of elections.
This becomes clear if we ask a basic
question: Can a party win an
election and come to power not
because it has popular support but
through electoral malpractices? This
is a vital question. Let us carefully
examine various aspects of this
question.
Independen IndependenIndependen IndependenIndependen t Ele t Elet Ele t Elet Ele c cc cction tiontion tiontionC CC CCommission ommissionommission ommissionommission
One simple way of checking whether
elections are fair or not is to look at
who conducts the elections. Are they
independent of the government? Or
can the government or the ruling party
influence or pressurise them? Do they
have enough powers to be able to
conduct free and fair elections? Do
they actually use these powers?
The answer to all these questions
is quite positive for our country. In
our country elections are conducted
by an independent and very powerful
Election Commission (EC). It enjoys
the same kind of independence that
the judiciary enjoys. The ChiefWhy does the
Election
Commission have
so much powers?
Is this good for
democracy?For more details about
the Election Commission
of India,
visit
https://eci.gov .in
2024-25
---
48 DEMOCRA TIC POLITICS
EC accepts new Har yana DGP
EC issues notification constituting 14th
Lok Sabha
Photo I-cards not mandatory in Biharpolls
EC tightens norms for poll expenses
EC to visit Gujarat again, review poll
arrangements
EC will seek power to censure
political ads
HC asks EC to bar ‘criminal’ netas
EC says no immediate plan to ban
Exit Polls
EC shoots down HM advice on
poll reforms
EC orders repoll in 398 more booths
EC to keep closer eye on hidden
poll costs
Read these headlines carefully and identify which powers are used by the Election Commission in each
instance to ensure free and fair elections.
P PP PPopular par opular paropular par opular paropular par ticipa ticipaticipa ticipaticipa tion tiontion tiontion
Another way to check the quality of
the election process is to see
whether people participate in it with
enthusiasm. If the election process
is not free or fair, people will not
continue to participate in the
exercise. Now,  read these charts
and draw some conclusions about
participation in India:
CHECK
YOUR
PROGRESS
1991 2015102030405060708090
5666
58626078
72
5966
ELECTION YEARVOTER TURNOUT (%)UK
INDIA1VOTER TURNOUT IN INDIA AND THE UK1People’s participation in election
is usually measured by voter
turnout  figures. Turnout indicates
the per cent of eligible voters who
actually cast their vote. Over the
last fifty years, the turnout in
Europe and North  America has
declined. In India the turnout has
either remained stable or actually
gone up.
2024-25
---
49
2In India the poor, illiterate and
underprivileged people vote in
larger proportion as compared to
the rich and privileged sections.
This is in contrast to western
democracies. For example in the
United States of America, poor
people, African Americans and
Hispanics vote much less than the
rich and the white people.
3Common people in India attach a
lot of importance to elections.
They feel that through elections
they can bring pressure on
political parties to adopt policies
and programmes favourable to
them. They also feel that their vote
matters in the way things are run
in the country.2VOTER TURNOUT IN INDIA AND US BY SOCIAL GROUPS, 2004
SOCIAL GROUPSUpper
CasteOBC SC ST White Black Hispanic565860 61 60
56
28
Source: Figures for India
from National Election
Study 2004, C SDS.
Figures for US from
National Election Study
2004, University of
Michigan.INDIA USVOTER TURNOUT (%)
10203040506070
ACTIVITY
Ask the eligible voters in your family whether they
voted in the last election to the Lok Sabha or to
the state assembly . If they did not, ask them why
did they not vote. If they did, ask them which par ty
and candidate they voted for and why . Also ask
them whether they had par ticipated in any other
election-related activity like attending an election
meeting or rally etc.
Acceptance of electionAcceptance of electionAcceptance of electionAcceptance of electionAcceptance of electionoutcome outcomeoutcome outcomeoutcome
One final test of the free and fairness
of election has in the outcome itself.
If elections are not free or fair, the
outcome always favours the powerful.
In such a situation, the ruling parties
do not lose elections. Usually, the
ELECTORAL POLITICS
67%3DO YOU THINK YOUR VOTE MAKES A DIFFERENCE?
15%
18%
Has effect
Has no effect
Don’t knowSource: National Election
Study 2004, CSDS.1996 1998 1999 20048132132 (%)
102030404THOSE WHO P ARTICIP ATED IN ANY
ELECTION RELA TED ACTIVITY IN INDIA
Source: National Election Study 1996-2004, C SDS.4The interest of voters in election-
related activities has been
increasing over the years. During
the 2004 elections, more than one-
third voters took part in a
campaign-related activities. More
than half of the people identified
themselves as being close to one
or the other political party. One
out of every seven voters is a
member of a political party.
ELECTION YEAR
2024-25
---
50 DEMOCRA TIC POLITICS
losing party does not accept the
outcome of a rigged election.
The outcome of India’s elections
speaks for itself:
/UIstopThe ruling parties routinely lose
elections in India both at the
national and state level. In fact in
every two out of the three elections
held in the last 25 years, the
ruling party lost.
/UIstopIn the US, an incumbent  or ‘sitting’
elected representative rarely loses
an election. In India about half of
the sitting MPs or MLAs lose
elections.
/UIstopCandidates who are known to have
spent a lot of money on ‘buying
votes’ and those with known
criminal connections often lose
elections.
/UIstopBarring very few disputed
elections, the electoral outcomes
are usually accepted as ‘people’s
verdict’ by the defeated party.
C CC CChallenges t hallenges thallenges t hallenges thallenges t o fr o fro fr o fro free and fair ee and fairee and fair ee and fairee and fairele eleele eleelec cc cctions tionstions tionstions
All this leads to a simple conclusion:
elections in India are basically free
and fair. The party that wins an elec-
tion and forms government does so
because people have chosen it over
its rivals. This may not be true for
every constituency. A few candidates
may win purely on the basis of
money power and unfair means. But
the overall verdict of a general elec-
tion still reflects popular preference.
There are very few exceptions to this
rule in the last 60 years in our
country. This is what makes Indian
elections democratic.
Yet the picture looks different if we
ask deeper questions: Are people’s
preferences based on real knowledge?
Are the voters getting a real choice?
Is election really level playing field
for everyone? Can an ordinary
citizen hope to win  elections?Questions of this kind bring the
many limitations and challenges of
Indian elections to our attention.
These include :The leader is coming out of a press
conference: “What was the need to say that we
have distributed tickets only amongst suitable
and winnable family relations?” Do you think
that family politics is confined to only a few
states or par ties?
Titled ‘Electoral
Campaigns’, this
cartoon was drawn in
the Latin American
context. Does this
apply to India
and to other
democracies
in the world?
©Nerilicon, El Economista, Cagle Cartoons Inc.
rrrrreeeeeaaaaaddddd
ttttthe hehe hehe
cccccaaaaarrrrrtttttoon oonoon oonoonIrfan Khan
2024-25
---
51/UIstopCandidates and parties with a lot
of money may not be sure of their
victory but they do enjoy a big and
unfair advantage over smaller
parties and independents.
/UIstopIn some parts of the country,
candidates with criminal connection
have been able to push others out of
the electoral race and to secure a
‘ticket’ from major parties.
/UIstopSome families tend to dominate
political parties; tickets are
distributed to relatives from these
families.
/UIstopVery often elections offer little
choice to ordinary citizens, for
both the major parties are quite
ELECTORAL POLITICSsimilar to each other both in
policies and practice.
/UIstopSmaller parties and independent
candidates suffer a huge
disadvantage compared to bigger
parties.
These challenges exist not just in
India but also in many established
democracies. These deeper issues
are a matter of concern for those who
believe in democracy. That is why
citizens, social activists and
organisations have been demanding
reforms in our electoral system. Can
you think of some reforms? What
can an ordinary citizen do to face
these challenges?
rrrrreeeeeaaaaaddddd
ttttthe hehe hehe
cccccaaaaarrrrrtttttoon oonoon oonoonIs this an accurate
picture of what
happens to the voter
before and af ter
elections? Must this
always happen in a
democracy? Can you
think of examples
when this did not
happen?
CHECK
YOUR
PROGRESSHere are some facts on Indian elections. Comment on each of these to say whether they reflect the
strength or the weakness of our electoral system:
/UIstopThe 16th Lok Sabha has 12 per cent women members.
/UIstopThe Election Commission often refuses to accept the government’s advice about when the elections
should be held.
/UIstopThe 16th Lok Sabha has more than 440 members whose assets are more than Rs.1 crore.
/UIstopAfter losing an election the Chief Minister said: “I respect the people’s verdict”.
R.K. Laxman, The T imes of India
2024-25
---
52 DEMOCRA TIC POLITICS
GLOSSAR YCode of Conduct : A set of norms and guidelines to be followed by
political parties and contesting candidates during election time.
Constituency : Voters in a geographical area who elect a representative to
the legislative bodies.
Incumbent : The current holder of a political office. Usually the choice for
the voters in elections is between the incumbent party or candidate and
those who oppose them.
Level playing field : Condition in which all parties and candidates
contesting in an election have equal opportunities to appeal for votes and
to carry out election campaign.
Rigging : Fraud and malpractices indulged by a party or candidate to
increase its votes. It includes stuffing ballot boxes by a few persons using
the votes of others; recording multiple votes by the same person; and
bribing or coercing polling officers to favour a candidate.
Turnout: The percentage of eligible voters who cast their votes in an elec tion.
1 Which of the following statements about the reasons for conducting
elections are false?
aElections enable people to judge the performance of the
government.
bPeople select the representative of their choice in an election.
cElections enable people to evaluate the performance of the
judiciary.
dPeople can indicate which policies they prefer.
2 Which of these is not  a good reason to say that Indian elections are
democratic?
aIndia has the largest number of voters in the world.
bIndia’s Election Commission is very powerful.
cIn India, everyone above the age of 18 has a right to vote.
dIn India, the losing parties accept the electoral verdict.
3 Match the following :
a It is necessary to keep the voters
list up to date because
b Some constituencies are
reserved for SCs and STs so
that
c Everyone has one and only one
vote so that
d Party in power is not allowed to
use government vehicles
becauseexercises
i there is a fair representation of
all sections of our society
ii everyone has equal
opportunity to elect their
representative
iii all candidates must have a fair
chance of competing in
elections
iv some people may have moved
away from the area where they
voted last
2024-25
---
534 List all the different election related activities mentioned in the chapter
and arrange them in a time sequence, beginning with the first activity
and ending with the last. Some of these activities are given below:
releasing election manifestos; counting of votes; making of voters’
list; election campaign; declaration of election results; casting of votes;
ordering of re-poll; announcing election schedule; filing nomination.
5 Surekha is an officer in-charge of ensuring free and fair elections in
an assembly constituency in a state. Describe what should she focus
on for each of the following stages of election:
aElection campaign
bPolling day
cCounting day
6 The table below gives the proportion of different communities among
the candidates who won elections to the US Congress. Compare these
to the proportion of these communities in the population of the US.
Based on this, would you suggest a system of reservations in the US
Congress? If yes, why and for which communities? If no, why not?
7 Can we draw the following conclusions from the information given
in this chapter? Give two facts to support your position for each of
these.
aElection Commission of India does not have enough powers to
conduct free and fair elections in the country.
bThere is a high level of popular participation in the elections in
our country.
cIt is very easy for the party in power to win an election.
dMany reforms are needed to make our elections completely free
and fair.
8 Chinappa was convicted for torturing his wife for dowry. Satbir was
held guilty of practicing untouchability. The court did not allow either
of them to contest elections. Does this decision go against the
principles of democratic elections?
9 Here are some reports of electoral malpractices from different parts of
the world. Is there anything that these countries can learn from India
to improve their elections? What would you suggest in each case?
aDuring an election in Nigeria, the officer in charge of counting
votes deliberately increased the votes of one candidate and declaredProportion of the community
(in per cent) in the
House of
representatives
8
5
86Population of US
13
13
70Blacks
Hispanics
Whites
ELECTORAL POLITICSexercises
2024-25
---
54 DEMOCRA TIC POLITICS
exerciseshim elected. The court later found out that more than five lakh
votes cast for one candidate were counted in favour of another.
bJust before elections in Fiji, a pamphlet was distributed warning
voters that a vote for former Prime Minister, Mahendra Chaudhry
will lead to bloodshed. This was a threat to voters of Indian origin.
cIn the US, each state has its own method of voting, its own
procedure of counting and its own authority for conducting
elections. Authorities in the state of Florida took many controversial
decisions that favoured Mr. Bush in the presidential elections in
2000. But no one could change those decisions.
10 Here are some reports of malpractices in Indian elections. Identify
what the problem in each case is. What should be done to correct the
situation?
aFollowing the announcement of elections, the minister promised
to provide financial aid to reopen the closed sugar mill.
bOpposition parties alleged that their statements and campaign
was not given due attention in Doordarshan and All India Radio.
cAn inquiry by the Election Commission showed that electoral rolls
of a state contain name of 20 lakh fake voters.
dThe hoodlums of a political party were moving with guns, physically
preventing supporters of other political parties to meet the voters
and attacking meetings of other parties.
11 Ramesh was not in class when this chapter was being taught. He
came the next day and repeated what he had heard from his father.
Can you tell Ramesh what is wrong with these statements?
aWomen always vote the way men tell them to. So what is the point
of giving them the right to vote?
bParty politics creates tension in society. Elections should be decided
by consensus not by competition.
cOnly graduates should be allowed to stand as candidates for
elections.
Assembly elections are usually held every year in a few states of the
country. You can collect information about the elections that take place
during this session. While collecting news items, divide these into three
parts:
/UIstopImportant events that took place before the election – main agenda
discussed by political parties; information about people’s demand;
role of the Election Commission.
/UIstopImportant events on the day of the election and counting – turnout
in elections; reports of malpractice; re-polls; the types of predictions
made; and the final outcome.
/UIstopPost elections – reasons offered by political parties for winning or
losing elections; analysis of the election verdict by the media;
selection of the Chief Minister.
2024-25
---
55
Is Electoral Literacy Club (ELC) functioning in
your school? For details about Systematic V oters’
Education and Electoral Participation (SVEEP)
programme of the Election Commission of India,
visit http://ecisveep.nic.inHow did your school celebrate the National V oters’ Day
on 25th January? Did you take the NVD Pledge?
National V oters’  Day (NVD) Pledge
We, the citizens of India, having abiding faith in
democracy, hereby pledge to uphold the democratic
traditions of our country and the dignity of free, fair
and peaceful elections, and to vote in every election
fearlessly and without being influenced by
considerations of religion, race, caste, community,
language or any inducement.
The tableau of the Election Commission of India passes through the Rajpath, New Delhi, on the occasion
of the 67th Republic Day Parade in 2016.
2024-25
---
56 DEMOCRA TIC POLITICSOVERVIEW
Democracy is not just about people electing their rulers. In a democracy
the rulers have to follow some rules and procedures. They have to work
with and within institutions. This chapter is about the working of such
institutions in a democracy. We try to understand this by looking at the
manner in which major decisions are taken and implemented in our
country. We also look at how disputes regarding these decisions are
resolved. In this process we come across three institutions that play a key
role in major decisions – legislature, executive and judiciary.
You have already read something about these institutions in earlier
classes. Here we shall quickly summarise those and move on to asking
larger questions. In the case of each institution we ask: What does this
institution do? How is this institution connected to other institutions?
What makes its functioning more or less democratic? The basic objective
here is to understand how all these institutions together carry on the
work of government. Sometimes we compare these with similar institutions
in other democracies. In this chapter we take our examples from the
working of the national level government called Central Government, Union
Government, or just Government of India. While reading this chapter, you
can think of and discuss examples from the working of the government in
your state.CHAPTER 4
Working o f
Instituti ons
2024-25
---
57
4.1 H OW IS A MAJOR POLICY  DECISION  TAKEN?
Pensions, signed the Order. It was
quite short, barely one page. It
looked like any ordinary circular or
notice that you may have seen in
school. The government issues hun-
dreds of orders every day on differ-
ent matters. But this one was very
important and became a source of
controversy for several years. Let us
see how the decision was taken and
what happened later.A Government OrderA Government OrderA Government OrderA Government OrderA Government Order
On August 13, 1990, the Government
of India issued an Order. It was
called an Office Memorandum. Like
all government orders, it had a num-
ber and is known by that: O. M. No.
36012/31/90-Est (SCT), dated
13.8.1990. The Joint Secretary, an
officer in the Department of Person-
nel and Training in the Ministry of
Personnel, Public Grievances and
WORKIN G OF INSTITUTI ONS
2024-25
---
58 DEMOCRA TIC POLITICS
This Order announced a major
policy decision. It said that 27 per
cent of the vacancies in civil posts
and services under the Government
of India are reserved for the Socially
and Educationally Backward Classes
(SEBC). SEBC is another name for all
those people who belong to castes
that are considered backward by the
government. The benefit of job res-
ervation was till then available only
to Scheduled Castes and Scheduled
Tribes. Now a new third category
called SEBC was introduced. Only
persons who belong to backward
classes were eligible for this quota
of 27 per cent jobs. Others could not
compete for these jobs.
T TT TThe D he Dhe D he Dhe D e ee eecision M cision Mcision M cision Mcision M ak akak akakers ersers ersers
Who decided to issue this
Memorandum? Clearly, such a big
decision could not have been taken
by the person who signed that
document. The officer was merely
implementing the instructions given
by the Minister of Personnel, Public
Grievances and Pensions, of which
the Department was a part. We can
guess that such a major decision
would have involved other major
functionaries in our country. You
have already read in the previous
class about some of them. Let us go
over some of the main points that
you covered then:
/UIstopPresident is the head of the state
and is the highest formal authority
in the country.
/UIstopPrime Minister is the head of the
government  and actually exercises
all governmental powers. He takes
most of the decisions in the
Cabinet meetings.
/UIstopParliament consists of the
President and two Houses, Lok
Sabha and Rajya Sabha. The Prime
Minister must have the support of
a majority of Lok Sabha members.So, were all these people involved
in this decision regarding the Office
Memorandum? Let us find out.
ACTIVITY
/UIstopWhich points, other than the ones mentioned
above, do you recall about these institutions
from the previous class? Discuss in class.
/UIstopCan you think of a major decision made by
your state gover nment? How were the Gover -
nor, the Council of Ministers, the state assem-
bly and the cour ts involved in that decision?
This Office Memorandum was the
culmination of a long chain of
events. The Government of India had
appointed the Second Backward
Classes Commission in 1979. It was
headed by B.P. Mandal. Hence it was
popularly called the Mandal
Commission. It was asked to
determine the criteria to identify the
socially and educationally backward
classes in India and recommend
steps to be taken for their
advancement. The Commission gave
its Report in 1980 and made many
recommendations. One of these  was
that 27 per cent of government jobs
be reserved for the socially and
educationally backward classes.
The Report and recommendations
were discussed in the Parliament.
For several years, many
parliamentarians and parties kept
demanding the implementation of
the Commission’s recommendations.
Then came the  Lok Sabha election
of 1989. In its election manifesto,
the Janata Dal promised that if voted
to power, it would implement the
Mandal Commission report. The
Janata Dal did form the government
after this election. Its leader V. P.
Singh became the Prime Minister .
Several developments took place
after that:Now I can see
clearly! That is why
they talk of
Mandalisation of
politics. Don’t they?Is every Office
Memorandum a
major political
decision? If not,
what made this
one different?
2024-25
---
59were full of different views and
opinions on this issue. It led to
widespread protests and counter-
protests, some of which were violent.
People reacted strongly because this
decision affected thousands of job
opportunities. Some felt that
existence of inequalities among
people of different castes in India
necessitated job reservations. They
felt, this would give a fair
opportunity to those communities
who so far had not adequately been
represented in government
employment.
Others felt that this was unfair as
it would deny equality of opportunity
to those who did not belong to
backward communities. They would
be denied jobs even though they
could be more qualified. Some felt
that this would perpetuate caste
feelings among people and hamper
national unity. In this chapter we
won’t discuss whether the decision
was good or not. We only take this
example to understand how major
decisions are taken and
implemented in the country.
Who resolve d this dispute? You
know that the Supreme Court and the
High Courts in India settle disputes
arising out of governmental decisions.
Some persons and associations
opposed to this order filed a number
of cases in the courts. They appealed
to the courts to declare the order
invalid and stop its implementation.
The Supreme Court of India bunched
all these cases together. This case was
known as the ‘Indira Sawhney and
others Vs Union of India case’. Eleven
judges of the Supreme Court heard
arguments of both sides. By a
majority , the Supreme Court judges
in 1992 declared  that this order of the
Government of India was valid. At
the same time the Supreme Court
asked the government to modify its
WORKIN G OF INSTITUTI ONS/UIstopThe President of India in his
address to the Parliament
announced the intention of the
government to implement the
recommendations of the Mandal
Commission.
/UIstopOn 6 August 1990, the Union
Cabinet took a formal decision to
implement the recommendations.
/UIstopNext day Prime Minister V.P. Singh
informed the Parliament about
this decision through a statement
in both the Houses of Parliament.
/UIstopThe decision of the Cabinet was
sent to the Department of Personnel
and Training. The senior officers of
the Department drafted an order in
line with the Cabinet decision and
took the minister’s approval. An
officer signed the order on behalf of
the Union Government. This was
how O.M. No. 36012/ 31/90 was
born on 13 August 1990.
For the next few months, this was
the most hotly debated issue in the
country. Newspapers and magazinesReservation debate
was such an
impor tant issue during
1990-91 that
adver tisers used this
theme to sell their
products. Can you
spot some references
to political events and
debates in these Amul
Butter hoardings?
©GCMMF India
rrrrreeeeeaaaaaddddd
ttttthe hehe hehe
ima imaima imaimage gege gege
2024-25
---
60 DEMOCRA TIC POLITICS
Who did what in this case of reservations for backward classes?
Made formal announcement about this decision
Implemented the decision by issuing an order
Took the decision to give 27% job reser vations
Upheld reservations as valid
CHECK
YOUR
PROGRESSoriginal order. It said that well-to-
do persons among the backward
classes should be excluded from
getting the benefit of reservation.
Accordingly, the Department of
Which institutions
are at work in the
running of your
school? W ould it
be better if one
person alone took
all the decisions
regarding
management of
your school?Personnel and Training issued
another Office Memorandum on
8 September 1993. The dispute
thus came to an end and this policy
has been followed since then.
N NN NNee eeee eeeed f d fd f d fd for P or Por P or Por P olitical Institutionsolitical Institutionsolitical Institutionsolitical Institutionsolitical Institutions
We have seen one example of how
the government works. Governing a
country involves various such
activities. For example, the
government is responsible for
ensuring security to the citizens and
providing facilities for educ ation
and health to all. It collects taxes
and spends the money thus raised
on admi nistration, defence and
developm ent programmes. It
formulates and implements several
welfare sche mes. Some persons have
to take decisions on how to go about
these activities. Others have to
implement these decisions. If
disputes arise on these decisions or
in their implementati on, there should
be someone to determine what is
right and what is wrong. It is
important that everyone should
know who is responsible for doing
what. It is also important that these
activities keep taking place even if
the persons in key positions change.
So, to attend to all these tasks,
several arrangements are made in
all modern democracies. Such
arrangements are called institutions.
A democracy works well wh en these
institutions perform  functions
assigned to them. The Constitution
of any country lays down basic
rules on the powers and functionsof each institution. In the example
above, we saw several such
institutions at work.
/UIstopThe Prime Minister and the
Cabinet are institutions that take
all important policy decisions.
/UIstopThe Civil Servants, working
together, are responsible for
taking steps to implement the
ministers’ decisions.
/UIstopSupreme Court is an institution
where disputes between citizens
and the government are finally
settled.
Can you think of some other insti-
tutions in this example? What is
their role?
Working with institutions is not
easy. Institutions involve rules and
regulations. This can bind the hands
of leaders. Institutions involve
meetings, committees and routines.
This often leads to delays and
complications. Therefore dealing
with institutions can be frustrating.
One might feel that it is much better
to have one person take all decisions
without any rules, procedures and
meetings. But that is not the spirit
of democracy. Some of the delays
and complications introduced by
institutions are very useful. They
provide an opportunity for a wider
set of people to be consulted in any
decision. Institutions make it
Supreme Cour t
Cabinet
President
Government Officials
2024-25
---
61
difficult to have a good decision
taken very quickly. But they also
make it equally difficult to rush
class and try to imagine what
Parliament could have done if it did
not approve of the Cabinet’s
decision.
W WW WWh hh hhy do w y do wy do w y do wy do w e nee e neee nee e neee nee d a d ad a d ad a
P PP PPar arar ararliamen liamenliamen liamenliamen t? t?t? t?t?
In all democracies, an assembly of
elected representatives exercises
supreme political authority on
behalf of the people. In India such a
national assembly of elected
representatives is called Parliament.
At the state level this is called
Legislature  or Legislative Assembly.
The name may vary in different
countries, but such an assembly
exists in every democracy. It
exercises political authority on
behalf of the people in many ways:
1Parliament is the final authority for
making laws in any country. This
task of law making or legislation
is so crucial that these assemblies
are called legislatures. Parliaments
all over the world can make new
laws, change existing laws, or
abolish existing laws and make
new ones in their place.
2Parliaments all over the world
exercise some control over those
who run the government. In some
countries like India this control is
direct and full. Those who run the
government can take decisions
only so long as they enjoy support
of Parliament.
3Parliaments control all the money
that governments have. In most
countries the public money can
be spent only when Parliament
sanctions it.through a bad decision. That is why
democratic governments insist on
institutions.
4.2 P ARLIAMENT
In the example of the Office
Memorandum, do you remember
the role of Parliament? Perhaps not.
Since this decision was not taken
by Parliament, you might think that
Parliament had no role in it. But let
us go back to the story and see
whether Parliament figures in it. Let
us recall the points made earlier by
completing the following sentences:
/UIstopThe Report of the Mandal
Commission was discussed …
/UIstopThe President of India mentioned
this in his …
/UIstopThe Prime Minister made a …
The decision was not directly taken
in Parliament. But Parliamentary
discussions on the Report influenced
and shaped the decision of the
government. They brought pressure
on the government to act on the
Mandal recommendation. If
Parliament  was not in favour of this
decision, the Government could not
have gone ahead with it. Can you
guess why? Recall what you read
about Parliament in the earlier
WORKIN G OF INSTITUTI ONSIrfan Khan
2024-25
---
62 DEMOCRA TIC POLITICS
4Parliament is the highest forum of
discussion and debate on public
issues and national policy in any
country. Parliament can seek
information about any matter.
T TT TTw ww wwo H o Ho H o Ho H ouses of P ouses of Pouses of P ouses of Pouses of P ar arar ararliamen liamenliamen liamenliamen t tt tt
Since Parliament plays a central
role in modern democracies, most
large countries divide the role and
powers of Parliament in two parts.
They are called Chambers or
Houses. One House is usually
directly elected by the people and
exercises the real power on behalf
of the people. The second House is
usually elected indirectly and
performs some special functions.
The most common work for the
second House is to look after the
interests of various states, regions
or federal units.
In our country, Parliament
consists of two Houses. The two
Houses are known as the Council of
States (Rajya Sabha) and the House
of the People (Lok Sabha). The
President of India is a part of
Parliament, although she is not a
member of either House. That is why
all laws made in the Houses come
into force only after they receive the
assent of the President.
You have read about the Indian
Parliament in earlier classes. From
the Chapter 3 you know how Lok
Sabha elections take place. Let us
recall some key differences between
the composition of these two Houses
of Parliament. Answer the following
for the Lok Sabha and the Rajya
Sabha:
/UIstopWhat is the total number of
members? …
/UIstopWho elects the members? …
/UIstopWhat is the length of the term (in
years)? …
/UIstopCan the House be dissolved or is
it permanent? …What is the point in
having so much
debate and
discussion in the
Parliament when
we know that the
view of the ruling
party is going to
prevail?Which of the two Houses is more
powerful? It might appear that the
Rajya Sabha is more powerful, for
sometimes it is called the ‘Upper
Chamber’ and the Lok Sabha the
‘Lower Chamber’. But this does not
mean that Rajya Sabha is more
powerful than Lok Sabha. This is
just an old style of speaking and not
the language used in our
Constitution.
Our Constitution does give the
Rajya Sabha some special powers
over the states. But on most matters,
the Lok Sabha exercises supreme
power. Let us see how:
1Any ordinary law needs to be
passed by both the Houses. But if
there is a difference between the
two Houses, the final decision is
taken in a joint session in which
members of both the Houses sit
together. Because of the larger
number of members, the view of
the Lok Sabha is likely to prevail
in such a meeting.
2Lok Sabha exercises more powers
in money matters. Once the Lok
Sabha passes the budget of the
government or any other money
related law, the Rajya Sabha
cannot reject it. The Rajya Sabha
can only delay it by 14 days or
suggest changes in it. The Lok
Sabha may or may not accept
these changes.
ACTIVITY
When Parliament is in session, there is a special
programme everyday on Doordarshan about the
proceedings in Lok Sabha and Rajya Sabha. Watch
the proceedings or read about it in the newspapers
and note the following:
/UIstopPowers of the two Houses of Parliament.
/UIstopRole of the Speaker .
/UIstopRole of the Opposition.
2024-25
---
63
 WORKIN G OF INSTITUTI ONSA day in the life of the Lok Sabha
Railways in addition to that sanctioned in the
Railway Budget.
The Minister of Human Resource Development
introduced the National Commission for Minority
Educational Institutions Bill, 2004. He also gave a
statement explaining why the government had to
bring an ordinance for this.
12:14 Several members highlighted
some issues, including:
/UIstopThe vindictiveness of the Central Bureau of
Investigation (CBI) in registering cases against
some leaders in the T ehelka case.
/UIstopNeed to include R ajasthani as an official
language in the Constitution.
/UIstopNeed to renew the insurance policies of
farmers and agricultural workers of Andhra
Pradesh.
2:26 Two bills proposed by the
gover nment were considered and
passed. These were:
/UIstopThe Securities Laws (Amendment) Bill
/UIstopThe Enforcement of Security Interest and
Recover y of Debts Laws (Amendment) Bill
4:00 Finally , there was a long
discussion regarding the foreign
policy of the gover nment and the
need to continue an independent
foreign policy in the context of the
situation in Iraq.
7:17 Discussion concluded. House
adjour ned for next day .
3Most importantly, the Lok Sabha
controls the Council of Ministers.
Only a person who enjoys the
support of the majority of the
members in the Lok Sabha is
appointed the Prime Minister. If themajority of the Lok Sabha members
say they have ‘no confidence’ in the
Council of Ministers, all ministers
including the Prime Minister, have
to quit. The Rajya Sabha does not
have this power.
7 December 2004 was an ordinary day in the life of
the Fourteenth Lok Sabha. Let us take a look at what
happened in the course of that day . Identif y the role
and powers of the parliament on the basis of the
proceedings for the day as given below . You can
also enact this day in your classroom.
11:00  Various ministries gave
written answers to about 250
questions that were asked by
members. These included:
/UIstopWhat is the gover nment’s policy on talking to
militant groups in Kashmir?
/UIstopWhat are the figures of atrocities against
Scheduled T ribes, including those inflicted by
the police?
/UIstopWhat is the gover nment doing about over -
pricing of medicines by big companies?
12:00  A large number of official
documents were presented and were
available for discussion. These
included:
/UIstopRecruitment r ules for the Indo- Tibetan Border
Police F orce
/UIstopAnnual R epor t of the Indian Institute of
Technology , Kharagpur
/UIstopReport and accounts of R ashtriya Ispat Nigam
Limited, Visakhapatnam
12:02  The Minister of Development
of Nor th Easter n Region made a
statement regarding R evitalisation of
the Nor th Easter n Council.
The Minister of State for Railways presented a
statement showing the grant needed by the
2024-25
---
64 DEMOCRA TIC POLITICS4.3POLITICAL EXECUTIVE
Do you remember the story of the
Office Memorandum with which we
started this chapter? We found out
that the person who signed the
document did not take this
decision. He was only executing the
policy decision taken by someone
else. We noted the role of the Prime
Minister in taking that decision. But
we also know that he could not
have taken that decision if he did
not have support from the Lok Sabha.
In that sense he was only executing
the wishes of the Parliament.
Thus, at different levels of any
government we find functionaries
who take day-to-day decisions but
do not exercise supreme power on
behalf of the people. All those
functionaries are collectively known
as the executive . They are called
executive because they are in charge
of the ‘execution’ of the policies of
the government. Thus, when we talk
about ‘the government’ we usually
mean the executive.
P PP PPolitical and P olitical and Political and P olitical and Political and P er erer erermanen manenmanen manenmanen t tt ttE EE EEx xx xxe ee eec cc ccutiv utivutiv utivutiv e ee ee
In a democratic country, two
categories make up the executive.
One that is elected by the people for
a specific period, is called the
political executive. Political leaders
who take the big decisions fall in this
category. In the second category,
people are  appointed on a long-term
basis. This is called the permanent
executive or civil services. Persons
working in civil services are called
civil servants. They remain in office
even when the ruling party changes.
These officers work under political
executive and assist them in
carrying out the day-to-day
administration. Can you recall the
role of political and non-politicalexecutive in the case of the Office
Memorandum?
You might ask: Why does the
political executive have more power
than the non-political executive?
Why is the minister more powerful
than the civil servant? The civil
servant is usually more educated
and has more expert knowledge of
the subject. The advisors working in
the Finance Ministry know more
about economics than the Finance
Minister. Sometimes the ministers
may know very little about the
technical matters that come under
their ministry. This could easily
happen in ministries like Defence,
Industry, Health, Science and
Technology, Mines, etc. Why should
the minister have the final say on
these matters?
The reason is very simple. In a
democracy the will of the people is
supreme. The minister is an elected
representative of the people and
thus empowered to exercise the will
of the people on their behalf. She is
finally answerable to the people for
all the consequences of her
decision. That is why the minister
takes all the final decisions. The
minister decides the overall
framework and objectives in which
decisions on policy should be
made. The minister is not, and is not
expected to be, an expert in the
matters of her ministry. The
minister takes the advice of experts
on all technical matters. But very
often experts hold different opinions
or place before her more than one
option. Depending on what the
overall objective is, the minister
decides.
Actually this happens in any large
organisation. Those who understand
the overall picture take the most
2024-25
---
65
important decisions, not the
experts. The experts can tell the
route, but someone with a larger
view decides the destination. In a
democracy elected ministers
perform this role.
P PP PPr rr rrime M ime Mime M ime Mime M inist inistinist inistinist er and C er and Cer and C er and Cer and C ouncil ouncilouncil ouncilouncilof M of Mof M of Mof M inist inistinist inistinist ers ersers ersers
Prime Minister is the most
important political institution  in the
country. Yet there is no direct
election to the post of the Prime
Minister. The President appoints the
Prime Minister. But the President
cannot appoint anyone she likes.
The President appoints the leader
of the majority party or the coalition
of parties that commands a majority
in the Lok Sabha, as Prime Minister.
In case no single party or alliance
gets a majority, the President
appoints the person most likely to
secure a majority support. The
Prime Minister does not have a fixed
tenure. He continues in power so
long as he remains the leader of the
majority party or coalition.After the appointment of the Prime
Minister, the President appoints
other ministers on the advice of the
Prime Minister. The Ministers are
usually from the party or the
coalition that has the majority in the
Lok Sabha. The Prime Minister is
free to choose ministers, as long as
they are members of Parliament.
Sometimes, a person who is not a
member of Parliament can also
become a minister. But such a
person has to get elected to one of
the Houses of Parliament within six
months of appointment as minister.
Council of Ministers is the official
name for the body that includes all
the Ministers. It usually has 60 to
80 Ministers of different ranks.
/UIstopCabinet Ministers  are usually top-
level leaders of the ruling party or
parties who are in charge of the
major ministries. Usually the
Cabinet Ministers meet to take
decisions in the name of the
Council of Ministers. Cabinet is
thus the inner ring of the Council
of Ministers. It comprises about 25
ministers.
/UIstopMinisters of State with indepen-
dent charge  are usually in-charge
of smaller Ministries. They
participate in the Cabinet meet-
ings only when specially invited.
/UIstopMinisters of State  are attached to
and required to assist Cabinet
Ministers.
Since it is not practical for all
ministers to meet regularly and
discuss everything, the decisions are
taken in Cabinet meetings. That is
why parliamentary democracy in
most countries is often known as the
Cabinet form of government. The
Cabinet works as a team. The
ministers may have different views
and opinions, but everyone has to own
up to every decision of the Cabinet.
WORKIN G OF INSTITUTI ONSThe race to become
minister is not new .
Here is a car toon
depicting ministerial
aspirants waiting to
get a ber th in Nehr u’s
Cabinet af ter the
1962 elections. Why
do you think political
leaders are so keen to
become ministers?©Shankar . Don’t Spare Me
rrrrreeeeeaaaaaddddd
ttttthe hehe hehe
cccccaaaaarrrrrtttttoon oonoon oonoon
2024-25
---
66 DEMOCRA TIC POLITICS
No minister can openly criticise
any decision of the government,
even if it is about another Ministry
or Department. Every ministry has
secretaries, who are civil servants.
The secretaries provide the
necessary background information
to the ministers to take decisions.
The Cabinet as a team is assisted
by the Cabinet Secretariat. This
includes many senior civil servants
who try to coordinate the working of
different ministries.
ACTIVITY
/UIstopList the names of five Cabinet Ministers and
their ministries each at the Union level and in
your state.
/UIstopMeet the Mayor or Municipal Chairperson of
your town or the President of Zilla Parishad of
your district and ask him or her about how the
city, town or district is administered.
P PP PPo oo oow ww wwers of the ers of theers of the ers of theers of theP PP PPr rr rrime M ime Mime M ime Mime M inist inistinist inistinist er erer erer
The Constitution does not say very
much about the powers of the Prime
Minister or the ministers or their
relationship with each other. But as
head of the government, the Prime
Minister has wide ranging powers.
He chairs Cabinet meetings. He
coordinates the work of different
Departments. His decisions are final
in case disagreements arise between
Departments. He exercises general
supervision of different ministries.
All ministers work under his
leadership. The Prime Minister
distributes and redistributes work
to the ministers. He also has the
power to dismiss ministers. When
the Prime Minister quits, the entire
ministry quits.
Thus, if the Cabinet is the most
powerful institution in India, within
the Cabinet it is the Prime Ministerwho is the most powerful. The
powers of the Prime Minister in all
parliamentary democracies of the
world have increased so much in
recent decades that parliamentary
democracies are some times seen as
Prime Ministerial form of
government. As political parties have
come to play a major role in politics,
the Prime Minister controls the
Cabinet and Parliament through the
party. The media also contributes to
this trend by making politics and
elections as a competition between
top leaders of parties. In India too
we have seen such a tendency
towards the concentration of powers
in the hands of the Prime Minister.
Jawaharlal Nehru, the first Prime
Minister of India, exercised
enormous authority because he had
great influence over the public.
Indira Gandhi was also a very
powerful leader compared to her
colleagues in the Cabinet. Of course,
the extent of power wielded by a
Prime Minister also depends on the
personality of the person holding
that position.
However, in recent years the rise
of coalition politics has imposed
certain constraints on the power of
the Prime Minister. The PrimeThis car toon depicts
a cabinet meeting
chaired by P rime
Minister Indira Gandhi
in early 1970s, at the
peak of her popularity .
Do you think similar
cartoons could be
drawn about other
prime ministers who
followed her?
rrrrreeeeeaaaaaddddd
ttttthe hehe hehe
cccccaaaaarrrrrtttttoon oonoon oonoon©R.K . Laxman, The T imes of India
2024-25
---
67
Minister of a coalition government
cannot take decisions as he likes.
He has to accommodate different
groups and factions in his party as
well as among alliance partners. He
also has to heed to the views and
positions of the coalition partners
and other parties, on whose support
the survival of the government
depends.
The PresidentThe PresidentThe PresidentThe PresidentThe President
While the Prime Minister is the head
of the go vernment, the President is
the head of the State. In our political
system the head of the State exercises
only nominal powers. The President of
India is like the Queen of Britain whose
functions are to a large extent
ceremonial. The President supervises
the overall functioning of all the political
institutions in the country so that they
operate in harmony to achieve the
objectives of the State.The President is not elected directly
by the people. The elected Members
of Parliament (MPs) and the elected
Members of the Legislative
Assemblies (MLAs) elect her. A
candidate standing for President’s
post has to get a majority of votes to
win the election. This ensures that
the President can be seen to represent
the entire nation. At the same time
the President can never claim the kind
of direct popular mandate that the
Prime Minister can. This ensures that
she remains only a nominal executive.
The same is true of the powers of
the President. If you casually read
the Constitution you would think
that there is nothing that she cannot
do. All governmental activities take
place in the name of the President.
All laws and major policy decisions
of the government are issued in her
name. All major appointments are
made in the name of the President.
These include the appointment ofWhy does this
book refer to the
President as ‘she’?
Have we ever had
a woman President
in our country?
Did you protest
when the book
referred to the
Prime Minister as
‘he’? Have we not
had a woman
Prime Minister?
Why should we
assume that all the
important positions
are held by men?
WORKIN G OF INSTITUTI ONSThe President,
Shri Ram Nath Kovind
administering the oath of
office of the Prime Minister
to Shri Narendra Modi, at a
Swearing-in Ceremony , at
Rashtrapati Bhavan on
30 May 201 9.
Press Information Bureau
2024-25
---
68 DEMOCRA TIC POLITICS
CHECK
YOUR
PROGRESSthe Chief Justice of India, the
Judges of the Supreme Court and
the High Courts of the states, the
Governors of the states, the Election
Commissioners, ambassadors to
other countries, etc. All international
treaties and agreements are made in
the name of the President. The
President is the supreme
commander of the defence forces of
India.
But we should remember that the
President exercises all these powers
only on the advice of the Council of
Ministers. The President can ask the
Council of Ministers to reconsider its
advice. But if the same advice is
given again, she is bound to act
according to it. Similarly, a bill
passed by the Parliament becomes
a law only after the President gives
assent to it. If the President wants,
she can delay this for some time and
send the bill back to Parliament for
reconsideration. But if Parliament
passes the bill again, she has to
sign it.
So you may wonder what does the
President really do? Can she do
anything on her own at all? There is
one very important thing she should
do on her own: appoint the Prime
Minister. When a party or coalition
of parties secures a clear majority
in the elections, the President, has
to appoint the leader of the majority
party or the coalition that enjoys
majority support in the Lok Sabha.When no party or coalition gets a
majority in the Lok Sabha, the
President exercises her discretion.
The President appoints a leader who
in her opinion can muster majority
support in the Lok Sabha. In such a
case, the President can ask the
newly appointed Prime Minister to
prove majority support in the Lok
Sabha within a specified time.
The P residen tial S ystem
Presidents all over the world are not always nomi-
nal executives like the President of India. In many
countries of the world, the President is both the
head of the state and the head of the government.
The President of the United States of America is
the most well known example of this kind of Presi-
dent. The US President is directly elected by the
people. He personally chooses and appoints all
Ministers. The law making is still done by the leg-
islature (called the Congress in the US), but the
president can veto any law . Most impor tantly , the
president does not need the suppor t of the major -
ity of members in the Congress and neither is he
answerable to them. He has a fixed tenure of four
years and completes it even if his par ty does not
have a majority in the Congress.
This model is followed in most of the countries
of Latin America and many of the ex-Soviet Union
countries. Given the centrality of the President,
this system of government is called the Presiden-
tial form of government. In countries like ours that
follow the British model, the parliament is su-
preme. Therefore our system is called the parlia-
mentary system of government.
Eliamma, Annakutti and Marymol read the section on the President. Each of them had a question. Can
you help them in answering these questions?
Eliamma :What happens if the President and the Prime Minister disagree about some policy? Does the
view of the Prime Minister always prevail?
Annakutti: I find it funny that the P resident is the Supreme Commander of Ar med F orces. I doubt if the
President can even lif t a heavy gun. What is the point in making the President the Com-
mander?
Marymol :I would say , what is the point in having a P resident at all if all the real powers are with the
Prime Minister?
rrrrreeeeeaaaaaddddd
ttttthe hehe hehe
ima imaima imaimage gege gege
What is better for a
democracy: A
Prime Minister who
can do whatever
he wishes or a
Prime Minister who
needs to consult
other leaders and
parties?
2024-25
---
69
4.4 T HE JUDICIARY
ACTIVITY
Follow the news about any major cour t case in a
High Cour t or the Supreme Cour t. What was the
original verdict? Did the High Cour t or the
Supreme Cour t change it? What was the reason?
This is why an independent and
powerful judiciary  is considered
essential for democracies. All the
courts at different levels in a country
put together are called the judiciary.
The Indian judiciary consists of a
Supreme Court for the entire nation,
High Courts in the states, District
Courts and the courts at local level.
India has an integrated judiciary. It
means the Supreme Court controls
the judicial administration in the
country. Its decisions are binding on
all other courts of the country. It can
take up any dispute
/UIstopBetween citizens of the country;
/UIstopBetween citizens and government;
/UIstopBetween two or more state
governments; and
/UIstopBetween governments at the union
and state level.
It is the highest court of appeal in
civil and criminal cases. It can hear
appeals against the decisions of the
High Courts.
Independence of the judiciary
means that it is not under the
control of the legislature or the
executive. The judges do not act on
the direction of the government or
according to the wishes of the party
in power. That is why all modern
democracies have courts that are
independent of the legislature and
the executive. India has achieved
this. The judges of the Supreme
Court and the High Courts are
appointed by the President on the
advice of the Prime Minister and in
WORKIN G OF INSTITUTI ONSLet us return, one final time, to the
story of Office Memorandum that we
started with. This time let us not
recall the story, but imagine how
different the story could have been.
Remember, the story came to a
satisfactory end because the
Supreme Court gave a verdict that
was accepted by everyone. Imagine
what would have happened in the
following situations:
/UIstopIf there was nothing like a
Supreme Court in the country.
/UIstopEven if there was a Supreme
Court, if it had no power to judge
actions of the government.
/UIstopEven if it had the power, if no one
trusted the Supreme Court to give
a fair verdict.
/UIstopEven if it gave a fair judgement, if
those who appealed against the
Government Order did not accept
the judgement.It is quite common in
the US for judges to
be nominated on the
basis of well-known
political opinions and
affiliations. This
fictitious
adver tisement
appeared in the US in
2005 when P resident
Bush was considering
various candidates for
nomination to the US
supreme cour t. What
does this car toon say
about the
independence of the
judiciar y? Why do
such car toons not
appear in our
countr y? Does this
demonstrate the
independence of our
judiciar y?©M.E . Cohen, National , Cagle Cartoons Inc.
2024-25
---
70 DEMOCRA TIC POLITICS
consultation with  the Chief Justice
of the Supreme Court. In practice it
now means that the senior judges
of the Supreme Court select the new
judges of the Supreme Court and the
High Courts.  There  is very little scope
for interference by the political
executive. The senior most judge of
the Supreme Court is usually
appointed the Chief Justice. Once
a person is appointed as judge of the
Supreme Court or the High Court it
is nearly impossible to remove him
or her from that position. It is as
difficult as removing the President
of India. A judge can be removed
only by an impeachment motion
passed separately by two-thirds
members of the two Houses of the
Parliament. It has never happened
in the history of Indian democracy.
The judiciary in India is also one
of the most powerful in the world.
The Supreme Court and the High
Courts have the power to interpret
the Constitution of the country. They
can declare invalid any law of the
legislature or the actions of the
executive, whether at the Union
level or at the state level, if they find
such a law or action is against theConstitution. Thus they can
determine the Constitutional
validity of any legislation or action
of the executive in the country,
when it is challenged before them.
This is known as the judicial review.
The Supreme Court of India has also
ruled that the core or basic
principles of the Constitution cannot
be changed by the Parliament.
The powers and the independence
of the Indian judiciary allow it to act
as the guardian of the Fundamental
Rights. We shall see in the next
chapter that the citizens have a
right to approach the courts to seek
remedy in case of any violation of
their rights. In recent years the
Courts have given several
judgments and directives to protect
public interest and human rights.
Any one can approach the courts if
public interest is hurt by the actions
of government. This is called public
interest litigation. The courts
intervene to prevent the misuse of
the government ’s power to mak e
decisions. They check malpractices
on the part of pub lic officials. That is
why the judiciary enjoys a high level
of confidence among the people.
Give one reason each to argue that Indian judiciary is independent with respect to:
Appointment of judges : …
Removal of judges : …
Powers of the judiciary : …
CHECK
YOUR
PROGRESS
Why are people
allowed to go to
courts against the
government’s
decisions?
The Chief Justice of India, Shri Justice
J.S. Khehar administering the oath of the
office of the President of India to Shri Ram
Nath Kovind, at a swearing-in ceremony
in the Central Hall of Parliament in New
Delhi on 25 July 2017.
2024-25
---
71
GLOSSAR YCoalition government : A government formed by an alliance of two or more
political parties, usually when no single party enjoys majority support of
the members in a legislature.
Executive: A body of persons having authority to initiate major policies,
make decisions and implement them on the basis of the Constitution and
laws of the country.
Government : A set of institutions that have the power to make, implement
and interpret laws so as to ensure an orderly life. In its broad sense,
government administers and supervises over citizens and resources of a
country.
Judiciary : An institution empowered to administer justice and provide a
mechanism for the resolution of legal disputes. All the courts in the country
are collectively referred to as judiciary.
Legislature: An assembly of people’s representatives with the power to
enact laws for a country. In addition to enacting laws, legislatures have
authority to raise taxes and adopt the budget and other money bills.
Office Memorandum : A communication issued by an appropriate authority
stating the policy or decision of the government.
Political Institution: A set of procedures for regulating the conduct of
government and political life in the country.
Reservations : A policy that declares some positions in government
employment and educational institutions ‘reserved’ for people and
communities who have been discriminated against, are disadvantaged and
backward.
State : Political association occupying a definite territory, having an
organised government and possessing power to make domestic and foreign
policies. Governments may change, but the state continues. In common
speech, the terms country, nation and state are used as synonyms.
1 If you are elected as the President of India which of the following
decision can you take on your own?
aSelect the person you like as Prime Minister.
bDismiss a Prime Minister who has a majority in Lok Sabha.
cAsk for reconsideration of a bill passed by both the Houses.
dNominate the leaders of your choice to the Council of Ministers.
2 Who among the following is a part of the political executive?
aDistrict Collector
bSecretary of the Ministry of Home Affairs
cHome Minister
dDirector General of Police
3 Which of the following statements about the judiciary is false?
aEvery law passed by the Parliament needs approval of the Supreme
Court
bJudiciary can strike down a law if it goes against the spirit of the
Constitution
cJudiciary is independent of the Executive
dAny citizen can approach the courts if her rights are violated
WORKIN G OF INSTITUTI ONSexercises
2024-25
---
72 DEMOCRA TIC POLITICS4 Which of the following institutions can make changes to an existing
law of the country?
aThe Supreme Court
bThe President
cThe Prime Minister
dThe Parliament
5 Match the ministry with the news that the ministry may have released:
exercisesa A new policy is being made to
increase the jute exports from
the country.
b Telephone services will be made
more accessible to rural areas.
c The price of rice and wheat sold
under the Public Distribution
System will go down.
d A pulse polio campaign will be
launched.
e The allowances of the soldiers
posted on high altitudes will
be increased.i Ministry of Defence
ii Ministry of Agriculture, Food
and Public Distribution
iii Ministry of Health
iv Ministry of Commerce
and Industry
v Ministry of Communications
and Information Technology
6 Of all the institutions that we have studied in this chapter, name the
one that exercises the powers on each of the following matters.
aDecision on allocation of money for developing infrastructure like
roads, irrigation etc. and different welfare activities for the citizens
bConsiders the recommendation of a Committee on a law to regulate
the stock exchange
cDecides on a legal dispute between two state governments
dImplements the decision to provide relief for the victims of an
earthquake.
7 Why is the Prime Minister in India not directly elected by the people?
Choose the most appropriate answer and give reasons for your choice.
aIn a Parliamentary democracy only the leader of the majority party
in the Lok Sabha can become the Prime Minister.
bLok Sabha can remove the Prime Minister and the Council of Ministers
even before the expiry of their term.
cSince the Prime Minister is appointed by the President there is no
need for it.
dDirect election of the Prime Minister will involve lot of expenditure
on election.
8 Three friends went to watch a film that showed the hero becoming
Chief Minister for a day and making big changes in the state. Imran
said this is what the country needs. Rizwan said this kind of a personal
2024-25
---
73
exercises rule without institutions is dangerous. Shankar said all this is a
fantasy. No minister can do anything in one day. What would be
your reaction to such a film?
9 A teacher was making preparations for a mock parliament. She called
two students to act as leaders of two political parties. She gave them
an option: Each one could choose to have a majority either in the
mock Lok Sabha or in the mock Rajya Sabha. If this choice was given
to you, which one would you choose and why?
10 After reading the example of the reservation order, three students
had different reactions about the role of the judiciary. Which view,
according to you, is a correct reading of the role of judiciary?
aSrinivas argues that since the Supreme Court agreed with the
government, it is not independent.
bAnjaiah says that judiciary is independent because it could have
given a verdict against the government order. The Supreme Court
did direct the government to modify it.
cVijaya thinks that the judiciary is neither independent nor
conformist, but acts as a mediator between opposing parties. The
court struck a good balance between those who supported and
those who opposed the order.
Collect newspapers for the last one week and classify the news related to
the working of any of the institutions discussed in this chapter into four
groups:
/UIstopWorking of the  legislatures
/UIstopWorking of the  political executive
/UIstopWorking of the  civil services
/UIstopWorking of the  judiciary
WORKIN G OF INSTITUTI ONS
2024-25
---
74 DEMOCRA TIC POLITICSOVERVIEW
In the previous two chapters we have looked at two major elements of a
democratic government. In Chapter 3 we saw how a democratic
government has to be periodically elected by the people in a free and fair
manner. In Chapter 4 we learnt that a democracy must be based on
institutions that follow certain rules and procedures. These elements are
necessary but not sufficient for a democracy. Elections and institutions
need to be combined with a third element – enjoyment of rights – to make
a government democratic. Even the most properly elected rulers working
through the established institutional process must learn not to cross some
limits. Citizens’ democratic rights set those limits in a democracy.
This is what we take up in this final chapter of the book. We begin by
discussing some real life cases to imagine what it means to live without
rights. This leads to a discussion on what we mean by rights and why do
we need them. As in the previous chapters, the general discussion is
followed by a focus on India. We discuss one by one the Fundamental
Rights in the Indian Constitution. Then we turn to how these rights can
be used by ordinary citizens. Who will protect and enforce them? Finally
we take a look at how the scope of rights has been expanding.CHAPTER 5
DEMOCR ATIC
RIGHT S
2024-25
---
75
Dear Mr Tony Blair,
Firstly, how are you? I sent a
letter two years ago, why didn’t
you reply?!? I was waiting for a
long time but you did not reply.
Please can you give me an answer
to my question? Why is my dad in
prison? Why is he far away in
that Guantánamo Bay?! I miss my
dad so much. I have not seen my
dad for three years. I know my
dad has not done anything,
because he is a good man. I hear
everybody speak about my dad in
a nice way. Your children spend
Christmas with you, but me and
my brothers, and sisters have
spent Eid alone without our dad
for 3 years. What do y ou think
about that?
I hope you will answer me this
time.
Thank you,
From: Anas Jamil El-Banna,
9 years old.
7/12/20055.1LIFE WITHOUT  RIGHTS
were quite central to the
Constitution because …
Chapter 3: Every adult citizen of
India has the right to ... and to be ...
Chapter 4: If a law is against the
Constitution, every citizen has the
right to approach …
Let us now begin with three
examples of what it means to live in
the absence of rights.
P PP PPr rr rrison in G ison in Gison in G ison in Gison in G uan uanuan uanuantanamo B tanamo Btanamo B tanamo Btanamo B a aa aay yy yy
About 600 people were secretly
picked up by the US forces from all
over the world and put in a prison
in Guantanamo Bay, an area near
Cuba controlled by Amercian Navy.
Anas’s father, Jamil El-Banna, was
among them. The American
government said that they were
enemies of the US and linked to the
attack on New York on 11
September 2001. In most cases the
governments of their countries were
not asked or even informed about
their imprisonment. Like other
prisoners, El-Banna’s family got to
know that he was in that prison only
through the media. Families of
prisoners, media or even UN
representatives were not allowed to
meet them. The US army arrested
them, interrogated them and
decided whether to keep them there
or not. There was no trial before any
magistrate in the US. Nor could
these prisoners approach courts in
their own country.
Amnesty International , an
international human rights
organisation, collected information
on the condition of the prisoners in
Guantanamo Bay and reported that
the prisoners were being tortured in
ways that violated the US laws. TheyIn this book we have mentioned
rights again and again. If you
remember, we have discussed rights
in each of the four preceding
chapters. Can you fill in the blanks
by recalling the rights dimension in
each chapter?
Chapter 1: A comprehensive
definition of democracy includes …
Chapter 2: Our Constitution makers
believed that fundamental rights
DEMOCRA TIC RIGHTS
2024-25
---
76 DEMOCRA TIC POLITICS
were being denied the treatment
that even prisoners of war must get
as per international treaties. Many
prisoners had tried protesting against
these conditions by going on a hunger
strike. Prisoners were not released
even after they were officially declared
not guilty. An independent inquiry
by the UN supported these findings.
The UN Secretary General said the
prison in Guantanamo Bay should be
closed down. The US government
refused to accept these pleas.
C CC CCitiz itizitiz itizitizens ensens ensens’ ’’ ’’ R  R R  R Righ ighigh ighights in ts ints in ts ints inS SS SSaudi A audi Aaudi A audi Aaudi A r rr rrabia abiaabia abiaabia
The case of Guantanamo Bay looks
like an exception, for it involves the
government of one country denying
rights to citizens of another country.
Let us therefore look at the case of
Saudi Arabia and the position of the
citizens with regard to their
government. Consider these facts:
/UIstopThe country is ruled by a
hereditary king and the people
have no role in electing or
changing their rulers.
/UIstopThe king selects the legislature as
well as the executive. He appoints
the judges and can change any of
their decisions.
/UIstopCitizens cannot form political par-
ties or any political organisations.
Media cannot report anything that
the monarch does not like.
/UIstopThere is no freedom of religion.
Every citizen is required to be
Muslim. Non-Muslim residents
can follow their religion in private,
but not in public.
/UIstopWomen are subjected to many
public restrictions. The testimony
of one man is considered equal to
that of two women.
This is true not just of Saudi
Arabia. There are many countries in
the world where several of these
conditions exist.E EE EEthnic massacrthnic massacrthnic massacrthnic massacrthnic massacr e in K e in Ke in K e in Ke in K oso osooso osoosov vv vvo oo oo
You might think that this is possible
in an absolute monarchy but not
in countries which choose their
rulers . Just consider this story from
Kosovo. This was a province of
Yugoslavia before it s split. In this
province the population was
overwhelmingly ethnic Albanian.
But in the entire country, Serbs
were in majority. A narrow minded
Serb nationalist Milosevic
(pronounced Miloshevich) had won
the election. His government was
very hostile to the Kosovo
Albanians. He wanted the Serbs to
dominate the country. Many Serb
leaders thought that Ethnic
minorities like Albanians should
either leave the country or accept
the dominance of the Serbs.
This is what happened to an
Albanian family in a town in Kosovo
in April 1999:
“74-year-old Batisha Hoxha was
sitting in her kitchen with her 77-
year–old husband, Izet, staying
warm by the stove. They had heard
explosions but did not realise that
Serbian troops had already entered
the town. The next thing she knew,
five or six soldiers had burst through
the front door and were demanding
“Where are your children?”
“… they shot Izet three times in the
chest” recalled Batisha. With her
husband dying before her, the
soldiers pulled the wedding ring off
her finger and told her to get out.  “I
was not even outside the gate when they
burned the house ” … She was standing
on the street in the rain with no
house, no husband, no possessions
but the clothes she was wearing.”
This news report was typical of
what happened to thousands of
Albanians in that period. DoIf you were a Serb,
would you support
what Milosevic did
in Kosovo? Do you
think his project of
establishing Serb
dominance was
good for the
Serbs?
2024-25
---
77
remember that this massacre was
being carried out by the army of
their own country, working under
the direction of a leader who came
to power through democratic
elections. This was one of the worst
instances of killings based on ethnic
prejudices in recent times. Finally
several other countries intervened
to stop this massacre. Milosevic lost
power and was tried by the
International Court of Justice for
crimes against humanity.
For each of the three cases of life without rights, mention an example from India. These could include the
following:
/UIstopNewspaper repor ts on custodial violence.
/UIstopNewspaper repor ts on force-feeding of prisoners who go on hunger strike.
/UIstopEthnic massacre in any par t of our countr y.
/UIstopReports regarding unequal treatment of women.
List the similarities  and differences  between the earlier case and the Indian example. It is not necessary
that for each of these cases you must find an exact Indian parallel.
CHECK
YOUR
PROGRESS
DEMOCRA TIC RIGHTSACTIVITY
/UIstopWrite a letter to Anas Jamil in UK, describing
your reactions af ter reading his letter to T ony
Blair.
/UIstopWrite a letter from Batisha in K osovo to a
woman who faced a similar situation in
India.
/UIstopWrite a memorandum on behalf of women in
Saudi Arabia to the Secretar y General of the
United Nations.
Think of all the examples that we
have discussed so far. Think of the
victims in each example: the
prisoners in Guantanamo Bay,
women in Saudi Arabia, Albanians
in Kosovo. If you were in their
position, what would you have
wished? If you could, what would
you do to ensure that such things
do not happen to anyone?
You would perhaps desire a
system where security, dignity and
fair play are assured to everyone.
You might want, for example, that
no one should be arrested without
proper reason and information. And
if someone is arrested, he or she
should have a fair chance to defend
themselves. You might agree that
such assurance cannot apply toeverything. One has to be reasonable
in what one expects and demands of
everyone else, for one has to grant
the same to everyone.  But you might
insist that the assurance does not
remain on paper, that there is
someone to enforce these
assurances, that those who violate
these are punished. In other words,
you might want a system where at
least a minimum is guaranteed to
everyone – powerful or weak, rich
or poor, majority or minority. This
is the spirit behind thinking about
rights.
What are rights?What are rights?What are rights?What are rights?What are rights?
Rights are claims  of a person over
other fellow beings, over the society
and over the government. All of us5.2 R IGHTS  IN A DEMOCRACY
2024-25
---
78 DEMOCRA TIC POLITICS
want to live happily, without fear
and without being subjected to
degraded treatment. For this we
expect others to behave in such a
way that does not harm us or hurt
us. Equally, our actions should not
also harm or hurt others. So a right
is possible when you make a claim
that is equally possible for others.
You cannot have a right that harms
or hurts others. You cannot have a
right to play a game in such a way
that it breaks the neighbour’s
window. The Serbs in Yugoslavia
could not have claimed the whole
country for themselves. The claims
we make should be reasonable.
They should be such that can be
made available to others in an equal
measure. Thus, a right comes with
an obligation to respect other rights.
Just because we claim some thing
it does not become our right. It has
to be recognised by the society we
live in. Rights acquire meaning only
in society. Every society makes
certain rules to regulate our
conduct. They tell us what is right
and what is wrong. What is
recognised by the society as rightful
becomes the basis of rights. That is
why the notion of rights changes
from time to time and society to
society. Two hundred years ago
anyone who said that women should
have right to vote would have
sounded strange. Today not granting
them vote in Saudi Arabia appears
strange.
When the socially recognised
claims are written into law they
acquire real force. Otherwise they
remain merely as natural or moral
rights. The prisoners in
Guantanamo Bay had a moral claim
not to be tortured or humiliated. But
they could not go to anyone to
enforce this claim. When law
recognises some claims they becomeenforceable. We can then demand
their application. When fellow
citizens or the government do not
respect these rights we call it
violation or infringement of our
rights. In such circumstances
citizens can approach courts to
protect their rights. So, if we want
to call any claim a right, it has to
have these three qualities. Rights
are reasonable claims of persons
recognised by society and
sanctioned by law.
W WW WWh hh hhy do w y do wy do w y do wy do w e nee e neee nee e neee nee d r d rd r d rd righ ighigh ighights in a ts in ats in a ts in ats in ademocr democrdemocr democrdemocr ac acac acacy? y?y? y?y?
Rights are necessary for the very
sustenance of a democracy. In a
democracy every citizen has to have
the right to vote and the right to
be elected to government. For
democratic elections to take place,  it
is necessary that citizens should
have the right to express their
opinion, form political parties and
take part in political activities.
Rights also perform a very special
role in a democracy. Rights protect
minorities from the oppression of
majority. They ensure that the
majority cannot do whatever it likes.
Rights are guarantees which can be
used when things go wrong. Things
may go wrong when some citizens
may wish to take away the rights of
others. This usually happens when
those in majority want to dominate
those in minority. The government
should protect the citizens’ rights in
such a situation. But sometimes
elected governments may not
protect or may even attack the rights
of their own citizens. That is why
some rights need to be placed higher
than the government, so that the
government cannot violate them. In
most democracies the basic rights
of the citizen are written down in the
constitution.What are the
examples of
elected
governments not
protecting or even
attacking the rights
of their own
citizens? Why do
they do that?
2024-25
---
79/octasterisk45.3RIGHTS  IN THE INDIAN  CONSTITUTION
R RR RRigh ighigh ighight t t tt t t tt to E o Eo E o Eo E qualit qualitqualit qualitqualit y yy yy
The Constitution says that the
government shall not deny to any
person in India equality before the law
or the equal protection of the laws. It
means that the laws apply in the same
manner to all, regardless of a person’s
status. This is called the rule of law.
Rule of law is the foundation of any
democracy. It means that no person
is above the law. There cannot be any
distinction between a political leader,
government official and an ordinary
citizen.
Every citizen, from the Prime
Minister to a small farmer in a remote
village, is subjected to the same laws.
No person can legally claim any
special treatment or privilege just
because he or she happens to be an
important person. For example, a few
years ago a former Prime Minister of
the country faced a court case on
charges of cheating. The court finally
declared that he was not guilty. But
as long as the case continued, he had
to go to the court, give evidence and
file papers, just like any other citizen.
This basic position is further
clarified in the Constitution by
spelling out some implications of the
Right to Equality. The government
shall not discriminate against any
citizen on grounds only of religion,
race, caste, sex or place of birth. Every
citizen shall have access to public
places like shops, restaurants, hotels,
and cinema halls. Similarly, there
shall be no restriction with regard to
the use of wells, tanks, bathing ghats,
roads, playgrounds and places of
public resorts maintained by
government or dedicated to the use
of general public. This might appear
very obvious, but it was necessary  to
DEMOCRA TIC RIGHTSIn India, like most other
democracies in the world, these
rights are mentioned in the
Constitution. Some rights which are
fundamental to our life are given a
special status. They are called
Fundamental Rights. We have
already read in Chapter 2 the
preamble to our Constitution. It
talks about securing for all its
citizens equality, liberty and justice.
Fundamental Rights put this
promise into effect. They are an
important basic feature of India’s
Constitution.
You already know our Constitution
provides for six Fundamental Rights.
Can you recall these? What exactly
do these rights mean for an ordinary
citizen? Let us look at these one by
one.
Everyone knows
that the rich can
have better lawyers
in the courts. What
is the point in
talking about
equality before
law?
FUNDAMENT AL RIGHTSRight to
   Constitutional
        RemediesRight to
Equality
Right to
Freedom
Right to
Freedom
of
ReligionRight
    against
       Exploitation      Cultural and
   Educational
Rights
2024-25
---
80 DEMOCRA TIC POLITICS
incorporate these rights in the
Constitution of our country where the
traditional caste system did not allow
people from some communities to
access all public places.
The same principle applies to
public jobs. All citizens have equality
of opportunity in matters relating to
employment or appointment to any
position in the government. No
citizen shall be discriminated
against or made ineligible for
employment on the grounds
mentioned above. You have read in
Chapter 4 that the Government of
India has provided reservations for
Scheduled Castes, Scheduled
Tribes and Other Backward Classes.
Various governments have different
schemes for giving preference to
women, poor or physically
handicapped in some kinds of jobs.
Are these reservations against the
right to equality? They are not. For
equality does not mean giving
everyone the same treatment, no
matter what they need. Equality
means giving everyone an equal
opportunity to achieve whatever one
is capable of. Sometimes it is
necessary to give special treatment
to someone in order to ensure equal
opportunity. This is what job
reservations do. Just to clarify this,
the Constitution says that
reservations of this kind are not a
violation of the Right to Equality.
The principle of non-discrimination
extends to social life as well. The
Constitution mentions one extreme
form of social discrimination, the
practice of  untouchability, and
clearly directs the government to put
an end to it. The practice of
untouchability has been forbidden
in any form. Untouchability here
does not only mean refusal to touch
people belonging to certain castes.
It refers to any belief or social
ACTIVITY
/UIstopGo to the playground of the school or any sta-
dium and watch a 400 metre race on any track.
Why are the competitors in the outer lane placed
ahead of those in the inner lane at the star ting
point of the race? What would happen if all the
competitors star t the race from the same line?
Which of these two would be an equal and fair
race? Apply this example to a competition for
jobs.
/UIstopObser ve any big public building. Is there a ramp
for physically handicapped? Are there any other
facilities that make it possible for physically
handicapped to use the building in the same
way as any one else? Should these special fa-
cilities be provided, if it leads to extra expendi-
ture on the building? Do these special provi-
sions go against the principle of equality?
practice which looks down upon
people on account of their birth with
certain caste labels. Such practice
denies them interaction with others
or access to public places as equal
citizens. So the Constitution made
untouchability a punishable offence.
2024-25
---
81
R RR RRigh ighigh ighight t t tt t t tt t o F o Fo F o Fo F r rr rree eeee eeeedom domdom domdom
Freedom means absence of
constraints. In practical life it means
absence of interference in our affairs
by others – be it other individuals
or the government. We want to live
in society, but we want to be free.
We want to do things in the way we
want to do them. Others should not
dictate us what we should do. So,
under the Indian Constitution all
citizens have the right to
/UIstopFreedom of speech and expression
/UIstopAssembly in a peaceful manner
/UIstopForm associations and unions
/UIstopMove freely throughout the
country
/UIstopReside in any part of the country,
and
/UIstopPractice any profession, or to carry
on any occupation, trade or
business.
You should remember that every
citizen has the right to all these
freedoms. That means you cannot
exercise your freedom in such amanner that violates others’ right to
freedom. Your freedoms should not
cause public nuisance or disorder.
You are free to do everything which
injures no one else. Freedom is not
unlimited licence to do what one
wants. Accordingly, the government
can impose certain reasonable
restrictions on our freedoms in the
larger interests of the society.
Freedom of speech and
expression  is one of the essential
features of any democracy. Our ideas
and personality develop only when we
are able to freely communicate with
others. You may  think differently
from others. Even if a hundred
people think in one way, you should
have the freedom to think differently
and express your views accordingly.
You may disagree with a policy of
government or activities of an
association. You are free to criticise
the government or the activities of
the association in your
conversations with parents, friends
and relatives. You may publicise
your views through a pamphlet,
magazine or newspaper. You can do
it through paintings, poetry or
songs. However, you cannot use this
freedom to instigate violence against
others. You cannot use it to incite
people to rebel against government.Man y Forms of U ntouchabilit y
In 1999, P . Sainath wrote a series of newsrepor ts
in The Hindu describing untouchability and caste
discrimination that was still being practiced
against Dalits or persons belonging to Scheduled
Castes. He travelled to various par ts of the coun-
try and found that in many places:
/UIstopTea stalls kept two kinds of cups, one for Dalits
one for others;
/UIstopBarbers refused to ser ve dalit clients;
/UIstopDalit students were made to sit separately in the
classroom or drink water from separate picher ;
/UIstopDalit grooms were not allowed to ride a horse
in the wedding procession; and
/UIstopDalits were not allowed to use common
handpump or if they did, the handpump was
washed to purif y it.
All these fall under the definition of untouchability .
Can you think of some examples from your own
area?
DEMOCRA TIC RIGHTSShould the
freedom of
expression be
extended to those
who are spreading
wrong and narrow-
minded ideas?
Should they be
allowed to confuse
the public?
Irfan Khan
2024-25
---
82 DEMOCRA TIC POLITICS
Neither can you use it to defame
others by saying false and mean
things that cause damage to a
person’s reputation.
Citizens have the freedom to
hold meetings, processions, rallies
and demonstrations on any issue.
They may want to discuss a
problem, exchange ideas, mobilise
public support to a cause, or seek
votes for a candidate or party in an
election. But such meetings have to
be peaceful. They should not lead
to public disorder or breach of peace
in society. Those who participate in
these activities and meetings should
not carry weapons with them.
Citizens also can form associations.
For example workers in a factory can
form a workers’ union to promote
their interests. Some people in a
town may come together to form an
association to campaign against
corruption or pollution.
As citizens we have the freedom to
travel to any part of the country .
We are free to reside and settle in any
part of the territory of India. Let us
say a person who belongs to the state
of Assam wants to start a business
in Hyderabad. He may not have any
connection with that city, he may not
have even seen it ever. Yet as a citizen
of India he has the right to set up base
there. This right allows lakhs of
people to migrate from villages to
towns and from poorer regions of the
countries to prosperous regions and
big cities. The same freedom extends
to choice of occupations. No one can
force you to do or not to do a certain
job. Women cannot be told that some
kinds of occupations are not for them.
People from deprived castes cannot
be kept to their traditional
occupations.
The Constitution says that no
person can be deprived of his life or
personal liberty  except  according toprocedure established by law. It
means that no person can be killed
unless the court has ordered a death
sentence. It also means that a
government or police officer cannot
arrest or detain any citizen unless
he has proper legal justification.
Even when they do, they have to
follow some procedures:
/UIstopA person who is arrested and
detained in custody will have to be
informed of the reasons for such
arrest and detention.
/UIstopA person who is arrested and
detained shall be produced before
the nearest magistrate within a
period of 24 hours of arrest.
/UIstopSuch a person has the right to
consult a lawyer or engage a
lawyer for his defence.Irfan Khan Irfan Khan
2024-25
---
83
CHECK
YOUR
PROGRESS
CHECK
YOUR
PROGRESSLet us recall the cases of
Guantanamo Bay and Kosovo. The
victims in both these cases faced athreat to the most basic of all
liberties, the protection of
individual life and personal liberty.
Are these cases instances of violation of right to freedom? If yes, which constitutional provision does
each of these violate?
/UIstopThe gover nment of India banned Salman R ushdie’s book Satanic Verses  on the ground that it was
disrespectful to P rophet Mohammed and was likely to hur t the feelings of Muslim community .
/UIstopEvery film has to be approved by the Censor Board of the gover nment before it can be shown to
the public. But there is no such restriction if the same story is published in a book or a magazine.
/UIstopThe gover nment is considering a proposal that there will be industrial zones or sectors of economy
where workers will not be allowed to for m unions or go on strike.
/UIstopCity administration has imposed a ban on use of public microphones af ter 10 p.m. in view of the
approaching secondar y school examinations.
R RR RRigh ighigh ighight against E t against Et against E t against Et against E xploita xploitaxploita xploitaxploita tion tiontion tiontion
Once the right to liberty and equality
is granted, it follows that every
citizen has a right not to be
exploited. Yet the Constitution
makers thought is was necessary to
write down certain clear provisions
to prevent exploitation of the weaker
sections of the society.
The Constitution mentions three
specific evils and declares these
illegal. First, the Constitution
prohibits ‘traffic in human beings’.
Traffic here means selling and
buying of human beings, usually
women, for immoral purposes.
Second, our Constitution also
prohibits forced labour or begar  inany form. Begar  is a practice where
the worker is forced to render service
to the ‘master’ free of charge or at a
nominal remuneration. When this
practice takes place on a life-long
basis, it is called the practice of
bonded labour.
Finally, the Constitution also
prohibits child labour. No one can
employ a child below the age of
fourteen to work in any factory or
mine or in any other hazardous
work, such as railways and ports.
Using this as a basis many laws have
been made to prohibit children from
working in industries such as beedi
making, firecrackers and matches,
printing and dyeing.
DEMOCRA TIC RIGHTSOn the basis of these news repor ts write a letter to the editor or a petition to a cour t highlighting the
violation of right against exploitation:
A petition was filed in the
Madras High Court. The
petitioner said a lar ge number
of children aged between
seven and 12 were taken from
villages in Salem district and
sold at auctions at Olur Nagar
in Kerala’ s Thrissur district.
The petitioner requested the
courts to order the government
to check these facts.
(March 2005 )Children, from the age of five,
were employed in the iron ore
mines in the Hospet, Sandur and
the Ikal areas in Karnataka.
Children were forced to carry out
digging, breaking stones, loading,
dumping, transporting and
processing of iron ore with no
safety equipment, fixed wages and
working hours. They handled a
high-level of toxic wastes and
were exposed to mine dust, which
was above the permissible level.
The school dropout rate in the
region was very high. ( May 2005 )The latest annual survey
conducted by the National
Sample Survey Organisation
found that the number of female
child labourers was growing both
in rural and urban areas. The
survey revealed there were 41
female child labourers per
thousand worker population in
rural areas as against the
previous figure of 34 per
thousand. The figure for male
child had remained at 31. ( April
2005 )
2024-25
---
84 DEMOCRA TIC POLITICS
ACTIVITY
Do you know what the minimum wages in your
state are? If not, can you find out? Speak to five
people doing different types of work in your
neighbour hood and find out if they are ear ning
the minimum wages or not. Ask them if they know
what the minimum wages are. Ask them if men
and women are getting the same wages.
R RR RRigh ighigh ighight t t tt t t tt to F o Fo F o Fo Fr rr rree eeee eeeedom of R dom of Rdom of R dom of Rdom of R eligion eligioneligion eligioneligion
Right to freedom includes right to
freedom of religion as well. In this case
too, the Constitution makers were
very particular to state it clearly. You
have already read in Chapter 2 that
India is a secular state. Most people
in India, like anywhere else in the
world, follow different religions. Some
may not believe in any religion.
Secularism is based on the idea that
the state is concerned only with
relations among human beings, and
not with the relation between human
beings and God. A secular state is one
that does not establish any one
religion as official religion. Indian
secularism practices an attitude of a
principled and equal distance from
all religions. The state has to be
neutral and impartial in dealing with
all religions.
Every person has a right to
profess, practice and propagate
the religion  he or she believes in.
Every religious group or sect is free
to manage its religious affairs. A
right to propagate one’s religion,
however, does not mean that a
person has right to compel another
person to convert into his religion by
means of force, fraud, inducement or
allurement. Of course, a person is free
to change religion on his or her own
will. Freedom to practice religion
does not mean that a person can do
whatever he wants in the name ofreligion. For example, one cannot
sacrifice animals or human beings
as offerings to supernatural forces
or gods. Religious practices which
treat women as inferior or those that
infringe women’s freedom are not
allowed. For example, one cannot
force a widow to shave head or wear
white clothes.
A secular state is one that does not
confer any privilege or favour on any
particular religion. Nor does it pun-
ish or discriminate against people
on the basis of religion they follow.
Thus the government cannot com-
pel any person to pay any taxes for
the promotion or maintenance of
any particular religion or religious
institution. There shall be no
religious instruction in the govern-
ment educational institutions. In
educational institutions managed by
private bodies no person shall be
compelled to take part in any
religious instruction or to attend any
religious worship.
C CC CCultur ulturultur ulturultur al and E al and Eal and E al and Eal and E duca ducaduca ducaduca tional tionaltional tionaltionalR RR RRigh ighigh ighights tsts tsts
You might wonder why the
Constitution makers were so
particular in providing written
guarantees of the rights of the
minorities. Why are there no special
guarantees for the majority? Well, for
the simple reason that the working
of democracy gives power  to the
majority. It is the language, culture
and religion of minorities that needs
special protection. Otherwise, they
may get neglected or undermined
under the impact of the language,
religion and culture of the majority.
That is why the Constitution speci-
fies the cultural and educational
rights of the minorities:
/UIstopAny section of citizens with a
distinct language or culture have
a right to conserve it.The Constitution
does not give
people their
religion. Then how
can it give people
the right to practise
their religion?
2024-25
---
85
CHECK
YOUR
PROGRESS/UIstopAdmission to any educational
institution maintained by
government or receiving
government aid cannot be denied
to any citizen on the ground of
religion or language.
/UIstopAll minorities have the right to es-
tablish and administer educa-
tional institutions of their choice.
Here minority does not mean only
religious minority at the nationallevel. In some places people speaking
a particular language are in majority;
people speaking a different language
are in a minority. For example,
Telugu speaking people form a
majority in Andhra Pradesh. But they
are a minority in the neighbouring
State of Karnataka. Sikhs constitute
a majority in Punjab. But they are a
minority in Rajasthan, Haryana and
Delhi.
Read these news repor ts and identif y the right that is being debated in each of these cases:
/UIstopAn emergency session of the Shiromani Gurdwara Parbandhak Committee (SGPC) rejected the
proposal to for m a separate body to manage the affairs of Sikh shrines in Har yana. It war ned the
gover nment that the Sikh community would not tolerate any inter ference in their religious affairs.
(June 2005)
/UIstopThe Allahabad High Cour t quashed the Central law , which gave Aligar h Muslim University its minority
status, and held illegal the reser vation of seats for Muslims in its postgraduate medical courses.
(Januar y 2006)
/UIstopThe R ajasthan Gover nment has decided to enact an anti-conversion law . Christian leaders have said
that the Bill would aggravate the sense of insecurity and fear in the minds of minorities. (March 2005)
DEMOCRA TIC RIGHTSHow can we secureHow can we secureHow can we secureHow can we secureHow can we securethese rights?these rights?these rights?these rights?these rights?
If rights are like guarantees, they are
of no use if there is no one to honour
them. The fundamental rights in the
Constitution are important because
they are enforceable. We have a right
to seek the enforcement of the above
mentioned rights. This is called the
Right to Constitutional Remedies .
This itself is a Fundamental Right.
This right makes other rights
effective. It is possible that
sometimes our rights may be
violated by fellow citizens, private
bodies or by the government. When
any of our rights are violated we can
seek remedy through courts. If it is a
Fundamental Right we can directly
approach the Supreme Court or the
High Court of a state. That is why Dr.
Ambedkar called the Right to
Constitutional Remedies, ‘the heart
and soul’ of our Constitution.Can the President
of India stop you
from approaching
the Supreme Court
to secure your
fundamental
rights?
Fundamental Rights are
guaranteed against the actions of
the Legislatures, the Executive, and
any other authorities instituted by
the government. There can be no law
or action that violates the
Fundamental Rights. If any act of the
Legislature or the Executive takes
away or limits any of the
Fundamental Rights it will be
invalid. We can challenge such laws
of the central and state
governments, the policies and
actions of the government or the
governmental organisations like the
nationalised banks or electricity
boards. Courts also enforce the
Fundamental Rights against private
individuals and bodies. The
Supreme Court and High Courts
have the power to issue directions,
orders or writs  for the enforcement
of the Fundamental Rights. They can
also award compensation to the
2024-25
---
86 DEMOCRA TIC POLITICS
victims and punishment to the
violators. We have already seen in
Chapter 4 that the judiciary in our
country is independent of the
government and the parliament. We
also noted that our judiciary is very
powerful and can do whatever is
needed to protect the rights of the
citizens.
In case of any violation of a
Fundamental Right the aggrieved
person can go to a court for remedy.
But now, any person can go to court
against the violation of the
Fundamental Right, if it is of social
or public interest. It is called Public
Interest Litigation (PIL). Under thePIL any citizen or group of citizens
can approach the Supreme Court or
a High Court for the protection of
public interest against a particular
law or action of the government. One
can write to the judges even on a
postcard. The court will take up the
matter if the judges find it in public
interest.
ACTIVITY
Is there a State Human Rights Commission in
your state? Find out about its activities.
Write a petition to the NHRC if you know any
instances of human rights violation in your area.National Human R ights Commission
into any case of violation of human rights. It also
inquires into any case of abetment of such
violation or negligence in controlling it by any
government officer and takes other general steps
to promote human rights in the countr y. The
Commission presents its findings and
recommendations to the government or intervene
in the cour t on behalf of the victims. It has wide
ranging powers to car ry out its inquir y. Like any
court it can summon witnesses, question any
gover nment official, demand any official paper ,
visit any prison for inspection or send its own
team for on-the-spot inquir y.
Any citizen of India can write a letter to this
address to complain against the violation of
human rights:  National Human Rights
Commission , G.P.O. Complex, INA , New Delhi
1100 23. There is no fee or anyformal  procedure
to approach the NHRC.  Like NHRC, there are
State Human Rights  Commissions in all  the 28
states of the countr y. For more details, visit http:/
/www .nhrc.nic.in
Many cases of human rights violations in  diverse
fields are being  brought to the public notice from
across India.  Human rights organisations and the
media often criticise government agencies for not
seriously pursuing these cases or catching the
culprits.  Someone had to intervene on behalf of the
victims. This is where the National Human Rights
Commission stepped in. This is an independent
commission set up by law in 1993. Like
judiciar y, the Commission is independent of the
government. The Commission is appointed by the
President and includes retired judges, officers and
eminent citizens. Y et it does not have the burden of
deciding cour t cases. So it can focus on helping
the victims secure their human rights. These
include all the rights granted to the citizens by the
Constitution. For NHRC human rights also include
the rights mentioned in the UN sponsored
international treaties that India has signed.
The NHR C cannot by itself punish the guilty .
That is the responsibility of cour ts. The NHR C is
there to make independent and credible inquiry
2024-25
---
875.4EXPAND ING SCO PE OF RIGHTS
We began this chapter by discussing
the significance of rights. In much
of the chapter we have focussed only
on Fundamental Rights in the
Constitution. You might think that
Fundamental Rights granted by the
Constitution are the only rights
citizen have. This is not true. While
Fundamental Rights are the source
of all rights, our Constitution and
law offers a wider range of rights.
Over the years the scope of rights
has expanded.
Sometimes it leads to expansion
in the legal rights that the citizen can
enjoy. From time to time, the courts
gave judgments to expand the scope
of rights. Certain rights like right to
freedom of press, right to
information, and right to education
are derived from the Fundamental
Rights. Now school education has
become a right for Indian citizens.
The governments are responsible for
providing free and compulsory
education to all children up to the
age of 14 years. Parliament has
enacted a law giving the right to
information to the citizens. This Act
was made under the Fundamental
Right to freedom of thought and
expression. We have a right to seek
information from government
offices. Recently the Supreme Court
has expanded the meaning of the
right to life to include the right to
food. Also, rights are not limited only
to Fundamental Rights asenumerated in the Constitution.
Constitution provides many more
rights, which may not be Fundamental
Rights. For example the right to
property is not a Fundamental Right
but it is a constitutional right. Right to
vote in elections is an important
constitutional right.
Sometimes the expansion takes
place in what is called human rights.
These are universal moral claims that
may or may not have been recognised
by law. In that sense these claims are
not rights going by the definition that
we presented earlier. With the
expansion of democracy all over the
world, there is greater pressure on
governments to accept these claims.
Some international covenants  have
also contributed to the expansion of
rights.
Thus the scope of rights has been
expanding and new rights are
evolving over time. They are result
of struggle of the people. New rights
emerge as societies develop or as
new constitutions are made. The
Constitution of South Africa guarantees
its citizens several kinds of new rights:
<Right to privacy, so that citizens
or their home cannot be searched,
their phones cannot be tapped,
their communication cannot be
opened.
<Right to an environment that is not
harmful to their health or well-
being;
<Right to have access to adequate
housing.
DEMOCRA TIC RIGHTS
Are these rights
only for adults?
Which of these
rights are available
to children?
2024-25
---
88 DEMOCRA TIC POLITICS
GLOSSAR Y
<Right to have access to health care
services, sufficient food and water;
no one may be refused emergency
medical treatment.Many people think that the right to
work, right to health, right to minimum
livelihood and right to privacy
should be made fundamental rights
in India as well. What do you think?
Amnesty International : An
international organisation of
volunteers who campaign for
human rights. This organisation
brings out independent reports on
the violation of human rights all over
the world.
Claim: Demand for legal or moral
entitlements a person makes on
fellow citizens, society or the
government.
Covenant : Promise made by
individuals, groups or countries to
uphold a rule or principle. It is
legally binding on the signatories
to the agreement or statement.
Dalit : A person who belongs to the
castes which were considered low
and not touchable by others. Dalits
are also known by other names such
as the Scheduled Castes, Depressed
Classes etc.International C ovenan t onEconomic , Social and C ultur alRights
This inter national covenant recognises many
rights that are not directly a par t of the
Fundamental Rights in the Indian Constitution.
This has not yet become an inter national treaty .
But human right activists all over the world see
this as a standard of human rights. These include:
<right to work: oppor tunity to ever yone to ear n
livelihood by working
<right to safe and healthy working conditions,
fair wages that can provide decent standard of
living for the workers and their families
<right to adequate standard of living including
adequate food, clothing and housing
<right to social security and insurance
<right to health: medical care during illness,
special care for women during childbir th and
prevention of epidemics
<right to education: free and compulsor y primar y
education, equal access to higher education.
Ethnic group: An ethnic group is a human population whose members
usually identify with each other on the basis of a common ancestry. People
of an ethnic group are united by cultural practices, religious beliefs and
historical memories.
Traffic : Selling and buying of men, women or children for immoral
purposes.
Summon : An order issued by a court asking a person to appear before it.
Writ: A formal document containing an order of the court to the
government issued only by High Court or the Supreme Court.
2024-25
---
89exercises1 Which of the following is not an instance of an exercise of a
fundamental right?
aWorkers from Bihar go to the Punjab to work on the farms
bChristian missions set up a chain of missionary schools
cMen and women government employees get the same salary
dParents’ property is inherited by their children
2 Which of the following freedoms is not available to an Indian citizen?
aFreedom to criticise the government
bFreedom to participate in armed revolution
cFreedom to start a movement to change the government
dFreedom to oppose the central values of the Constitution
3 Which of the following rights is available under the Indian
Constitution?
aRight to work
bRight to adequate livelihood
cRight to protect one’s culture
dRight to privacy
4 Name the Fundamental Right under which each of the following rights
falls:
aFreedom to propagate one’s religion
bRight to life
cAbolition of untouchability
dBan on bonded labour
5 Which of these statements about the relationship between democracy
and rights is more valid? Give reasons for your preference.
aEvery country that is a democracy gives rights to its citizens.
bEvery country that gives rights to its citizens is a democracy.
cGiving rights is good, but it is not necessary for a democracy.
6 Are these restrictions on the right to freedom justified? Give reasons
for your answer.
aIndian citizens need permission to visit some border areas of the
country for reasons of security.
bOutsiders are not allowed to buy property in some areas to protect
the interest of the local population.
cThe government bans the publication of a book that can go against
the ruling party in the next elections.
7 Manoj went to a college to apply for admission into an MBA course.
The clerk refused to take his application and said “You, the son of a
sweeper, wish to be a manager! Has anyone done this job in your
community? Go to the municipality office and apply for a sweeper’s
position”. Which of Manoj’s fundamental rights are being violated in
this instance? Spell these out in a letter from Manoj to the district
collector.
DEMOCRA TIC RIGHTS
2024-25
---
90 DEMOCRA TIC POLITICS
exercises
8 When Madhurima went to the property registration office, the
Registrar told her, “You can’t write your name as Madhurima Banerjee
d/o A. K. Banerjee. You are married, so you must give your husband’s
name. Your husband’s surname is Rao. So your name should be
changed to Madhurima Rao.” She did not agree. She said “If my
husband’s name has not changed after marriage, why should mine?”
In your opinion who is right in this dispute? And why?
9 Thousands of tribals and other forest dwellers gathered at Piparia in
Hoshangabad district in Madhya Pradesh to protest against their
proposed displacement from the Satpura National Park, Bori Wildlife
Sanctuary and Panchmarhi Wildlife Sanctuary. They argue that such
a displacement is an attack on their  livelihood and beliefs. Government
claims that their displacement is essential for the development of
the area and for protection of wildlife. Write a petition on behalf of
the forest dwellers to the NHRC, a response from the government
and a report of the NHRC on this matter.
10 Draw a web interconnecting different rights discussed in this chapter.
For example right to freedom of movement is connected to the freedom
of occupation. One reason for this is that freedom of movement enables
a person to go to place of work within one’s village or city or to another
village, city or state. Similarly this right can be used for pilgrimage,
connected with freedom to follow one’s religion. Draw a circle for
each right and mark arrows that show connection between or among
different rights. For each arrow, give an example that shows the
linkage.
In every chapter we have done an exercise on reading the newspaper. Let
us now try to write for the newspaper. Take any example from the reports
discussed in this chapter or any other local example that you are familiar
with and write the following:
<Letter to the editor highlighting a case of human rights violation.
<Press release by a human rights organisation.
<A headline and a news item concerning a Supreme Court order
related to Fundamental Rights.
<Editorial on growing incidents of custodial violence.
Put these together and make a newspaper for your school notice board.
2024-25